Just say anything.
Thank
you.
Yep.
Yep. Get the commissioner on the line.
Will they fit?
There's a lot of them out there. Yeah, there are.
It's like, I reckon there's 100 people out there.
I don't think they're all coming here though, hopefully.
They're in.
Oh.
Only the ones in uniform.
F21.
Ah. Duncan got through the security.
Hello.
Oh, gosh.
So Dan, we have two hours on police, so-
One second. Oh, thank you.
It is also-
So that means he's left six minutes.
No, it's also at the discretion of the chair.
No.
You forget to say that bit.
Well, hang on.
Specific standing.
Can I ask the photographer? Can I ask the photographer, you're not doing
that in here, please.
Yes, he's allowed to. It's chocolate.
You're not going to do that in here.
Oh, geez.
You can stand up here if you like.
Duncan, I needed you yesterday and
Is that
sort of a benefit?
Where are they then?
You can be in here, but I don't want you running around chasing.
Can't roam around.
Duncan.
Has to be in a fixed position.
I don't want you running around chasing somebody.
All that's set up.
I
was like, um, hang on.
I think I should've been out there.
Karen's the usual one.
Look at that face.
This doesn't work.
You could be here.
Oh,
hi.
Hello.
Tell me about it. Would you like some water?
No
worries.
A little thingy. Say that like I type anything.
My little thingy.
Yeah, I think so. Yeah.
And so
Andrew, I'll just write like four or five and then I'll go.
Yeah, I do that. I always do that. I always do that.
That's right.
No, I want it green because it's going to do a very swap.
Oh, no, not on this topic.
Oh, okay.
Righto, everyone.
Not that we can hear you.
Okay. First of all, I'd like to thank the minister for turning up again
today. We've had you the other day on a different matter.
Also, I'd like to acknowledge the commissioner, Richard Chambers.
You're in London, I think. We're aware that you're going overseas,
so away on important police business.
But I'm very glad that you're up, probably in the middle of the night doing this
conference.
Just want to acknowledge all the other police in the room.
We've got two hours on police this morning, but we've got an
hour and a half with you, Minister.
I'm going to let you do some introductory comments, and then obviously we'll get
into it.
Well, yeah, thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to you and the committee.
I'll allow the, I've got the leadership team here from DC to allow
go introduce yourself and from the police and,
obviously Mark Mitchell, Minister of Police and also Minister
for the Serious Fraud Office. I've got a very short opening
comments. I'll pass the others to introduce themselves.
I'm the Deputy Commissioner, Mike Pennant.
Good.
Hi. Good morning. Andrea Conlon, Chief Operating Officer, Police.
Karen Chang, Director of the Serious Fraud Office.
Cool.
The government's expectations have been for police to focus on core policing,
hold offenders to account,
and support victims whose sense of safety and security has
been robbed by crime.
We have put in the resources, investment, and the laws needed to back up our
expectations, and that focus is working.
Wherever I go, people tell me that they see their local police out and about on the
streets,
and they feel safer as a result.
Major centers and urban areas have beat teams and gang disruption units.
The Gangs Act has been a major success in giving police the powers to
ensure gangs no longer have license to intimidate and take
over our provincial towns.
Ram raids have plummeted and retail crime is taken seriously,
benefiting workers, businesses, and the general public.
Boy racers no longer have it easy, and legislation before Parliament will
give police more powers to deal with their reckless and antisocial
behavior on our roads. Police have made excellent
progress on the key government targets that should continue into the coming
year.
Serious and repeat youth offending is down by 25% compared to
2023, and there were 49,000 fewer victims of violent
crime in the year to October 2025 than two years
previously.
As a result, people feel safer. Law and order has dropped well down the list of
issues that are a concern to the public in recent surveys such as
Ipsos that has been shown.
That has not happened by accident.
That is a result of excellent work by police,
as well as this government's investment to ensure the frontline has the
resources and powers to deliver on it.
That support has continued in this year's budget, which delivers
391 million in further investment for police to support the
frontline and the communities that they serve.
Budget 2026 includes investments in technology, property,
and 53.5 million funding for cost pressures to support the
frontline.
The government is delivering on upgrading and replacing stations that our frontline
police across the regions need.
I went to the opening of the new Taradale Police Station earlier this month, a base
that was built on time, under budget, and allows police to better
service the wider Hawke's Bay region.
This year's budget delivers funding for further much-needed replacements for the
Whanganui Police Station and Greymouth Police Station and
custody facility, and that is good news both for the police and the public in
those areas.
The budget also delivers funding to replace the automated biometric
identification system. That is key technology which is crucial for many
areas of core policing. The replacement technology for dealing with biometric
information such as fingerprints will be more effective, more efficient,
and result in faster outcomes for victims.
The budget also delivers on the coalition agreement by providing
8.3 million of funding for those groups which do a great
job in our communities to help the police keep people safe.
This funding for community patrols, Neighborhood Support NZ, and Pacific
Wardens gives them certainty and allows them to continue and expand their
services.
There is still much work to do, but I want to acknowledge the commissioner for his
work over the last year, his support for the frontline, his
focus on building trust and confidence by ensuring police deliver for
victims and the public. It is well-known police has had to deal with
some challenges over the last year.
The response to those challenges, in particular those highlighted in the
IPCA's November 2025 report, will continue to be
a focus for the government. I'm confident police is on solid
footing to address those issues. The new executive and leadership
teams are now in place. I welcome the commissioner's work to strengthen
integrity and his targets around trust and confidence,
public place violence, retail crime resolutions, and the service
people get from police.
The performance improvement review requested by the commissioner has given police
an independent overview of the challenges, and useful guidance on what
is needed over the short and longer terms.
There is good awareness of the challenges that lie ahead and a plan for the future.
In particular, the intended police capability plan is set to
be a valuable exercise in planning for the future investments police
require. The government will continue to work with police to ensure it is
well-placed to meet those challenges. Thank you.
Right. Thank you. I'm going to start with Honorable Jenny Anderson.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and to Minister and police
staff.
Minister, when are you going to reach the 500 more police that you promised at the
last election?
Well, the police are doing an outstanding job.
They've got a really strong pipeline of people wanting to join the police.
We've got people coming back from overseas,
and the numbers that I see and that are being tracked by both myself and
my Associate Minister of Police, Casey Costello, shows that the police
are on target to deliver the 500 towards the end of this year.
You've given lots of other dates in the past.
Why won't you give the public one now?
Well, I've been very clear that the police are showing
a clear motivation to deliver on that target and,
especially with the opening of the new training facility in Auckland,
they've got a strong pipeline of new police officers,
new people wanting to join the police.
We've got a large number of people wanting to rejoin the police, which I take as a
very good signal, and we've got people coming back from Australia.
Why did you promise 500 more police in two years then?
Because that was a coalition commitment.
Right.
Do you think that the police wages are a factor in why you are struggling to
recruit? And if so, are you looking to repay the risk,
as many police are asking?
Well, on a personal level, I always want to see any of our first
responders
paid as much as we can afford as a country.
There is currently bargaining underway, and it would be totally inappropriate for
me to comment on that.
So all members of Parliament have received numerous submissions from frontline
police. I'd just like to read one out of the hundreds we've got.
Quote, "We are increasingly understaffed, routinely exposed to serious
violence, and expected to absorb the cost of that risk.
Like many colleagues, I work long hours, take danger home with me, and still
struggle with the cost of living. The reality is pay no longer reflects
what we are being asked to do. Will you show up for us?
Will you repay the risk?" Do you have a response to that, Minister?
Yes. I'm very proud of the work that our frontline police officers do.
I'm very
aware of the challenges that they have, and that's why this government has invested
enormous amounts of money into our police and into our frontline to support them,
to give them more powers.
Since we've come into government, there's at least an additional 250 police
officers already out there on the front line.
We have freed up police officers from being mental health workers.
So the police are in a very good position in terms of front line
strength. There's more police to come, and there's been an enormous investment into
the front line. When I became police minister, the police were going broke.
The previous government had not invested in their cost pressures, they had not
invested in their core, and they were in danger of breaching their
appropriation. We immediately invested $120 million into police
to stabilize them. And this government is a law and order government, and it
remains committed to continuing to invest, and that's exactly what we've done.
I'm pleased you raised that, Minister, because you might like to explain to the
public why, for the second budget in a row, you appear to be paying for
police wages out of time-limited funding.
Why haven't you baselined the amount of money required to pay the wages
of front line police?
No, we've provided money in this budget for
collective bargaining, which is underway, and it would be totally inappropriate for
me to comment or talk to that.
So I've received that information through written PQs from you that the
$50 million time-limited funding specified in the budget,
$30 million is earmarked for wages out of that.
Why have you not baselined the amount of money required to pay the wages of front
line police?
Well, I'm very clear that we have provided money in this budget for
collective bargaining, and it is up to police then to enter into goodwill
collective bargaining with the association and the police guild, and that is
underway at the moment, and it would be totally inappropriate for me to comment any
further on that.
I'm not asking you to comment on the bargaining.
Okay, one more after this.
One more. I want to know why are police wages not part of the police
baseline in the budget?
Well, police have been funded for the... I'll say it a third time.
Police have been funded in this budget round
for the collective bargaining, which they're in now, which they're negotiating now.
Why have you not baselined that money? Why is it time limited each budget?
They've got the money available for their collective bargaining.
What happens when it runs out?
No, that's it. This is last one, Jenny.
You got a question or is that-
Oh, okay.
All right, I'll go to-
Thanks, Chair
...
.
Thanks very much, Minister, for joining us this morning, and thanks for the
commitment that you've made to our community across the country like Whanganui.
There has been some media report, though, about the fact that the
Whanganui Police Station, for example, was something that was already promised.
Can you comment on the journey that's got us to today?
Well, like a lot of things, there might've been a
public announcement about the Whanganui Police Station, but there was no funding
for it. And so this government has found the funding to actually be able to
deliver the Whanganui Police Station, and we recognize, police recognize that as a
priority because that's part of a broader
justice precinct that has been delivered there.
So under your leadership, the community can have confidence that that money
is actually allocated now and-
That money is allocated, it is ring-fenced, and police will
start working on that immediately.
Supplementary, Chair.
Can you just also tell us about the other funding that's gone
into that community,
to improve the police
facilities
in Whanganui over the last couple of years that have led into this decision
being made today?
Indeed, sweetie.
Sure. So we'd previously received funding for the custody care
facility, and the works on that is underway.
So that is a shared facility with the Ministry of Justice, which will
be operational in time for the new courthouse.
The new funding received through Budget '26 is specifically for the station
aspect of the hub, which we will now commence
.
Fantastic. Thank you.
All right. Good. I'm going to go to Timipone.
Timipone.
Morena. All right. I've got a couple topics that I'm interested
in today.
Mainly the move on orders. The other one is children being held in-
Just make sure there's some reference to the budget.
Yep.
All right.
Police held in... Sorry, children held in police cells, which might
overlap a little bit with
and
the stalking law and just how you're preparing to implement that,
and what costs have been associated with that.
So starting with the move on orders, that's a piece of legislation that'll
come into effect before the next budget.
The regulatory impact statement doesn't outline what the
associated costs are for police in implementing that
piece of legislation. I couldn't find specificity within the budget in terms of
how much that's going to cost to implement, but I did appreciate the police's
comments in the RIS about the bill around their
preference for a
infringement fee option. Anyway, that's all right. We got what we've got.
But how much is that going to cost to enforce the move on
orders, and how is the police preparing for those?
Yeah, police obviously will have to have a close look at that.
In my view,
probably it shouldn't be very much because there's a cost associated with police
time right now, in dealing with
the social disorder and the issues associated with rough sleepers and
people that are choosing to come out and live on the street.
As we both know that not only do they get used by
gangs to peddle drugs or
behave antisocially towards the people that, the residents
or the people that are coming to the CBDs and want to enjoy the
CBD,
they're also at risk themselves. We've had really clear advice from St.
John's that, and we saw a very clear example of that in
Christchurch about a month ago, where a rough sleeper was stabbed.
So we don't want people living on the streets.
The move on orders, currently in this country, there's no ability to be able to
move people from living on the streets. That's what the move on order is about.
The police will be-- It's about rough sleepers, people that are choosing
to come and actually live on the streets.
Many of those do have somewhere safe to go and sleep or stay.
The ones that are in genuine homelessness- I think that recently I was up
in Auckland and met with-
Mm
... the City Mission, and they've brought a couple of
really good policy ideas around how we can
perhaps, and this is something that we're looking at, it's not something that's
been announced as policy yet-
Mm
... because it's going through the process of Select Committee, et cetera.
But, requirement to engage.
Mm.
So, if the police are dealing with someone that doesn't have somewhere
to go, doesn't have somewhere safe to stay,
then there's a requirement for the government to engage and identify what are their
needs, if they're genuine homelessness needs, and then meet those needs.
And I think we'd get a nice balance around
the move on order. I thought that was actually some really good ideas that were
thought forward by the people that are also remembering that police are dealing
with
rough sleepers all the time. So is City Mission.
They're the same people.
Yeah. And I think it was really awesome that you went up and spent time at our Keep
Egg Make Change
with some of those organizations that do support people who are rough
sleeping. How does the,
I guess, budget commitment, which we don't fully understand yet, and the
policy rationale that you just outlined, align with
the fact that public disorder is at a 10-year low
according to police data?
Yeah. Because the police are coming, public disorder overall, across the board,
it's a broad spectrum. So boy races, gangs, note no provincial
towns,
general retail violence,
violence associated with on-license premises, those sorts of things.
Yep, all of that's coming down.
And actually, the rough sleeping situation is, I believe anyway,
is starting to improve as well. In fact, my stakeholder group that we're meeting
regularly in Auckland to try and fix the issues that we had in the CBD, Chloe was a
part of that.
We started to see some real gains, but we have got a really difficult,
stubborn group there that
just insist that they want to come out and live on the street for whatever
reason. And,
so that is what really what the move on orders are there for, so that we
can... Some of them don't want to engage with central government.
I heard that when I was up at the City Mission and in other groups, that actually
there's a s- deep suspicion of central government and local government, and they
don't want to engage. We have to have some sort of mechanism to get them to
engage, and then try and build out that trust, and actually the move on order
will be a very good mechanism of doing that.
Mm.
And that's why I think sitting on the other side, it'd be a very good idea for the
government to have a required to engage
rules in there too.
Mm, mm.
So that the genuine-
Yeah
... the people that are genuinely homeless, we can actually identify what the
issues are, and then go about actually fixing those.
And, as you know, you, because you're the person who, I
believe signs off when
we meet with police, so as you know, you've signed off a couple meetings that I've
had with-
Yeah
... senior police officials. And some of the conversations I've had,
my understanding was that they were seeking a move on order
in the first place for drunk people who stumbled out of the club at
3:00 a.m. and were just a complete nuisance to the public, and started fights
and were disorderly, as opposed to it being a tool used against
people who were rough sleeping or homeless.
So it seems like the purpose that police wanted these move on
orders, maybe has been a bit contorted by politics.
No, I don't think that. I definitely-
Maybe Sunny Kaushal influence?
No, I think that's definitely an issue, though.
Is that people that come into the CBDs,
and then want to cause trouble,
they take up a lot of police time.
So it's good that the move on orders will be able to assist with that as well.
I sort of want to get rid of this sort of perception that's trying to be built, and
this myth that the police want to go out and target people. They don't.
They actually just want to help people. That's what they're motivated for.
That's if you go to a graduation, see our young police officers graduating,
they're in their public service because they want to help and support the community
that they're in. And they don't want to-- no one wants to see homelessness.
And
they'll do everything that they can to be able to assist and support, making sure
if someone is identified with a, and they're homeless
and they need some support, then that can be delivered. They can't deliver that.
We need the rest of the government to respond and be able to actually deliver that
for them.
Right. That's my last question, is just around
children under 18 years old being held in police cells.
So,
and hope there might be someone in the room that might be able to assist with this,
or it might be more of a Oranga Tamariki question.
But, I've noticed that the percentage of young
people who are held in police custody for more than, sorry,
for less than 24 hours and for more than 24 hours seems to be
increasing. But they're... I can see Oranga Tamariki has changed the target.
So they used to record the number of kids held in police custody, which was
140, 186 last year, and now they've
changed it to at least 85%. So they're just becoming a,
they're changing their measures.
And I guess I was interested in,
have the police been liaising with Oranga Tamariki, and what's happening in that
space to make sure that kids aren't held in cells-
Yeah
... that were not designed for them?
Yeah. So police don't, as a whole, don't want to have youth offenders in the cells.
And in terms of the relationship between police and Oranga Tamariki, I think it's
the best and strongest it's been for a long time.
They are working very closely together.
We do rely on Oranga Tamariki to make a determined response in terms of
being able to actually house and look after these young people.
But I would say that the,
when we do have young people in our cells, they're well looked after.
Our authorized officers are some of the best in the world.
And often they're safer there than they would be back out on the streets,
re-offending, putting the public at risk and themselves.
But I acknowledge that we don't want to have them in police cells, and there's been
an enormous amount of work going in to make sure that they spend as little time
there and they're transitioned into a Oranga Tamariki facility.
But- I don't know. Do you-
If, yeah, if I may
comment, Minister, if that's all right. You can hear me okay?
Yes, we can.
Yeah. Okay, look, and I'm sorry that I can't be there with you.
I'm representing New Zealand at the Five Eyes law enforcement meeting,
as the deputy chair as well. Look, the executive
monitor young people in custody every single day.
It's one of the things we talk about at our 8:00 morning briefings.
We want to ensure that young people are kept out of our cells, but for a
range of reasons. And I will call on Tasha Penny shortly just
to talk a little bit about the sort of work that we do
with Oranga Tamariki on a daily basis.
But we are very conscious. We all support the need
to keep our young people out of police cells, and that is why we
work so hard. Daily we review it,
and most recently,
this morning even, dialing into the executives meeting here from London,
and I see there's one young person.
Well, we work hard every day to make sure that they are taken out of custody as
soon as possible and put into an appropriate location.
But Tasha, would you like to add anything further?
Yeah. Thanks, Commissioner. Kia ora.
So like the commissioner said, we do monitor it every day.
I think more importantly, we've just had a big look at it.
So whilst, if we compare the last
12 months to the previous, we're actually holding fewer children in
custody, however, for longer. And the longer looks like one hour.
So that's what it is, the median average.
What we do though is we are working very closely with Oranga
Tamariki. Two of us have just recently finished long-term
secondments there. The ones that we're holding for longer, and I think you
are really acutely aware of this, have really complex needs.
Like everyone said, we know that it's not ideal to hold young people
there. As a result of that, we have daily meetings with
Oranga Tamariki. We say, "We've held them for this long.
Where are the beds?" And the issue is when they need to go into
youth justice secure facilities and the bed rates.
But we are working probably closer than we ever have
before around this issue, monitoring the bed rates, ensuring that the
young people are looked after no matter what care they're in and are going
through. So it's something we challenge ourselves collectively
about all the time.
Right. I'm going to go to a supplementary from Rima Nakay.
Tasha, thank you very much. Good morning, everyone. Thank you.
Good morning, Becky.
You just said that you're working closer than ever before on this.
Why is that? And what's
prompted this extra closeness of
work with our children in custody?
So,
youth crime have been a long-term ...
There is no color to this issue. It's been a long-term social issue.
Sure.
But what we are doing, if we look at fast track for the 10 to 13 year olds that was
implemented in 2024, and the significant results that have
had. So that's that early intervention getting in, and it actually
all is about prevention. The serious and serious youth
persistent offenders, we're really having a look at that.
And like we've said, you're not going to get anyone who thinks that a young person
should be held in our custody, but the reality is sometimes they need to.
And the more effective our partnership is with Oranga Tamariki, and the more
we work together with them to make sure they get the right help, the right
assessment, then that's what we need to do.
I actually could talk about this for a long time, so I won't.
Okay.
But that's what I mean. We're really collectively...
And this is not a police issue. This is a far broader issue, and it's actually
not just a government issue e- either, as we see from the multitude of
NGOs and initiatives we've got going on.
We've piloted a new pilot that's just getting off the ground in
Christchurch around youth crime that already is showing
really good results. And I think the key thing is we're
co-locating around youth crime with Oranga Tamariki, and we are working
together as a team, because that is the only way we're actually going to make
long-term impacts with this issue.
Yeah.
Yeah, and I think there's just like,
I think the Assistant Commissioner just made a really good point, is that both
agencies are getting stronger because there's been that cross-pollination.
So you've got Assistant Commissioner Penny who's actually been seconded into
OT.
So they understand the demands and pressures.
And
with
support from the government,
we're working much closer together to actually deliver exactly what...
But it's going to take time, without a doubt.
All right.
We've got decades of-
I think we're going to go onto a new topic from Honorable Janine Anstey.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Policing Amendment Bill gives police powers to collect
intelligence, but the Privacy Commissioner has come out
very strongly saying that this legislation should not proceed
without the appropriate checks in place-
So just make sure that that's there
... which is the IT infrastructure to recall,
store, and destroy images. The last reports on that, that that was going to
be sought in the budget. I can't find that in the
budget. Is it your intention to proceed with that
legislation against the wishes of the Privacy Commissioner
without the IT infrastructure in place?
Yeah, I don't. I'd have to...
I don't want you to mischaracterize
the Privacy Commissioner. We have been working very closely with him and his
office. Of course, they have a critical role to play, but
we are reinstating powers that police always had and are critically
important for public safety. We make no apology for that.
And yes, we will be proceeding with it.
And
police have shown that they are responsible,
that they can actually-
Good morning
... that they can use their existing systems to be able to support the work that's
being done, and that we're investing heavily into their systems.
But I don't know if, Deputy, you wanted to comment any further on that?
No, we will continue to invest and we will look at
how we implement. There is quite considerable discussions to be going on around
the world, so that is still
Before the House. Welcome in
Is there any line in the budget you can identify that enables
funding for the requisite IT infrastructure for the storage,
destruction, and recollection of images?
Right.
Sure. So I guess the main thing here is this is about restoring
the store-
Can I get you to just pull the-
Sorry
... microphone towards both of you. Thanks.
Yeah
Is that better?
Yeah, just as close as you can get it. Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah, no worries.
So this is around retaining the right to store images
that we previously had. So we are confident that our existing
systems will have the capacity for that.
We are also working on improvements, particularly to our digital mobility
system, which is where we believe most of the
images will be taken. If you'd like more detail, I would need to call up our Chief
Information Officer, Matt Winter, who could talk to that in more depth, if you
would like.
Well, I still haven't kind of had the answer to the question, that the Privacy
Commissioner has ruled that you don't currently have the existing IT infrastructure
to be able to meet the requirements.
Well, that's the Privacy Commissioner's view.
And I don't see, and there's no money in the budget.
The last-
Well, I'm sorry, but-
If I could just be allowed to ask the question
... number one, I'd like to see the full context of the Privacy Commissioner's
views on that.
I can read it out to you, if you like. I can table it.
Well, that'd be great. But the second part is this.
That is the Privacy Commissioner's view.
He doesn't run the police systems, the police do.
So-
You don't agree with the Privacy Commissioner's ruling on it?
So I believe that the police have got a long track record of being able to manage
their own systems.
Yeah. Point of order, Chair.
What's that?
It's no public document.
It's not. It's a submission. It's publicly released.
It's a submission on the bill.
No, it's-
It's a submission on the bill
... any other I've sent.
Just on, in that document.
Public interest.
Just that, just-
It's a submission on the bill, and it's publicly available.
Just listen. Just stop. I'm just saying you can only refer to that document, so be
careful about it.
Do you disagree with the Privacy Commissioner's submission that your legislation
should not proceed given the fact you do not have the requisite-
I'm not commenting on the Privacy Commissioner's submission.
What I'm saying is that I've got full confidence that the police are able to
deliver, and will stick within the rules of the law, and
will be able to
respond to the policy.
So the Privacy Commissioner says that you do not.
Are you publicly disagreeing with the ruling of the Privacy Commissioner?
Oh, I just don't-
Look, I think we've heard your-
The police don't comment on the Privacy Commissioner's systems.
You just did
Okay.
No. I said that I don't agree. If that is the Privacy Commissioner's
position, then I don't agree with it.
I think the police have got the systems, they've got the capability to be able to
meet the need. The police are very, very conscious of
their responsibility to actually carry
out strictly the intent of the law.
And this is an important amendment bill that provides them the
powers that they always had, and that they lost through a, um-
Right. You're going to need to-
One more question. I won't-
Judge one
... so the last
comment that your office gave is that you need to
find a budget bid. This work is likely to be significant and
will likely require a business case to be developed for consideration in a future
budget cycle. That is an official paper written about
six months ago about this project.
Can you please tell me if you have a business case,
and if there is a budget bid for the IT required to meet the Privacy
Commissioner's ruling?
So the police are doing an enormous amount of work around business cases for
both physical infrastructure and IT infrastructure, because
it's been under-invested for decades, and-
Exactly
... and we are catching up on that. That's why we're making significant investment
through this budget round. If you want specific information on it, because you've
been offered, so if you're really genuinely-
Yeah. I want to hear that
... if you're really genuinely interested in this-
Okay
... why don't we bring Matt forward so that he can speak to that?
Great.
Thanks.
We'll just hear from the gentleman at the back.
Kia ora. Matt Winter, Chief Information Officer for New Zealand Police.
So the key part that we're focusing on is the digital notebook, which is a
relatively new capability for our officers, which works on their mobile
phones. So it should literally replace the physical ones they carry today, but with
a whole lot more capability. And that's the main way that we're going to manage
ingesting the photos, tagging them so we know the context within which they're
taken, and managing them through their life cycle.
So that's different from what we've had before.
And we've done that through a rolling program of work we have to
enhance our mobile applications.
I understand that, but my understanding, the digital notebook is a digital way of
what it would be the old police notebook.
That doesn't seem to have the IT infrastructure and capability to
store, destroy, and recall existing images. Am I correct?
That is what we're developing, and it...
So it didn't used to, but we have now developed the features to be able to take the
photos into the digital notebook. So that didn't used to be there.
That gets tagged with metadata, so we know the context of those photos as well, and
then we'll be building the life cycle management for the photo storage that sits
behind it as well.
That's great. So all of the photos that already exist, is that system able to do
that for all of the photos that haven't yet met the requirements of the Privacy
Commissioner?
No, this is a forward-looking piece of infrastructure.
So it won't do the re-
Right. Last one. Okay, cool.
Premier, sup.
No, I've got Rima Nakli. Was it sup?
Yeah. Supplementary, please. Minister, so with this work that we're
doing on the legislation that the Honorable Ginny Andersen
has just been going on about, what is the problem we're trying
to solve?
Oh, it's just a straight out policing problem, where
police historically had the ability to-
Okay
... collect images when it related to offending-
... for intelligence purposes. That helped obviously
investigations and solving crimes, keeping the public safe.
So they lost that ability, and we reinstated it.
No, it's because they were taking tens of thousands of pictures of kids.
Sorry.
Well, I'm-
Of kids
... I'm not going to get into a take-
That's where it came from
...
or an attack on police integrity.
It's not an attack, it's facts.
Well, it sounds like it's an attack-
Hey, look, if you're going to ask a question, ask it properly.
But I want to hear the response. Have you finished with Rima Nakli?
Yeah.
Sorry, I didn't hear the last part of that, Minister.
So you were saying to keep the public safe?
100%.
Can I go to Honourable Dr. Duncan Webb?
So, Minister, you've repeatedly said that this
is confirming an existing power.
Now, this is legislation that's being passed-
So this is in reference to the budget, right?
Yes. Yes, absolutely. In the systems in place.
It's here in the budget.
And the minister said in his opening that
this legislation recognizes an existing
power. So, he's opened up that line of questioning. I'm sucking off that.
No, you're not.
The Supreme Court-
You bring it in relation to the budget.
Yeah. Well, it's about how he's going to manage it.
But I'm interested in him explaining how he can say it's
an existing power when in the Temi Teina case,
the Supreme Court said that the conduct of taking
photographs there, and the resultant intrusion,
is not lawful, and to retain the photos on the
NIA was not lawful, and it amounted to a
warrantless and illegal search. So how can you continually
say that this is a recognition of an existing power when the
Supreme Court concluded that to take photographs
for intelligence purposes was not lawful?
So,
the police had that ability before the finding of the Temi Teina case,
and we're reinstating through the bill their ability to be able to collect
images again. Simple as that.
Okay. I'm going to Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Thanks. Maybe it's a question for you for a start, Minister, but I'd be
interested actually in the commissioner's comments.
You mentioned the commissioner had done this performance and improvement review.
I'm assuming some of the money in this budget allocation will go towards
work programs related to that. So maybe just your initial comments on that, and
then Commissioner, if you could tell us a bit more about that
review, what it found, and then what you're going to be doing in the year going
forward to implement it.
Yeah, thanks for the question. So, look, that was a review that was
initiated by the incoming commissioner,
which was helpful to inform him in terms of his
strategy and what he was looking to achieve with the
organization. And probably the commissioner's the best person to speak to that.
Yeah. Thank you very much for that.
As the minister says, it was me that commissioned that work.
And the reason I did that was I wanted to have an independent
assessment of where we're at as an organization and what are the things that
we need to work really, really hard at over the next few years.
So it was helpful to point towards further work that we need to do
in terms of our integrity action plan off of the back of the IPCC
report last year. That's the first thing.
The second thing, in terms of the
investment in the corporate side of policing and how we need to
continue to look to develop capability across the
various functions that support frontline police.
There was also a piece in there about ensuring that the work and effort we
put into investigations is the best that it can be.
Over the years, we've become quite specialized, and we want to make sure that right
from the time a new member of police, a recruit,
is trained right through their policing career, that they have an appreciation
of how a case works its way through the pipeline,
and that they're confident in dealing with that.
So it's about an end-to-end process about how do we deal with
investigations.
And then the other key thing is it reinforced just how much hard
work we need to continue to put into being
modern,
making best use of technology to help us be our best to get
outcomes.
So it presented some core themes for us, which we've
turned into a plan, which in the executive we monitor
frequently,
actions are assigned owners. And I'm really confident and
pleased with the progress that we've made. It's early days, of course.
But it was the right thing to do to commission the work because,
certainly through my tenure as the commissioner, I want to make sure that we're
doing our absolute best
as a law enforcement agency to keep our country safe.
Thank you. And a quick supplementary, if that's okay, Mr. Chair.
And you specifically mentioned the integrity action plan.
Yeah, I'd be very, again, keen to get some more detail on
what you've got planned in the coming year to support that because obviously,
trust and confidence in the police is a key pillar
of what we're concerned about. And look,
let's be frank, there's been
some very high profile incidents in the last few years.
So I think it is... And again,
I know our frontline staff are doing their hardest
work every day, but I'm sure they also feel that some of those things have let the
police force down. So just, again, keen to get your comments on the work you'll
be taking forward in this
budget to really strengthen that area and make sure people are understanding
their obligations, because I think even recently, I'm concerned that
people don't understand their obligations.
Yes. Look, thank you for raising it because this is an absolutely critical piece of
work for us, and you're absolutely right.
We've had our challenges
in recent times with high profile cases.
I'm very pleased with the progress that we have made against the recommendations
released by the IPCC at the end of last year.
Some of those, in summary, include a rewrite of the code of conduct.
That has been done, and we continue to update that as we go.
But that sets out much clearer expectations about
what we do when we identify potential issues.
Another recommendation is putting in place,
again, audits and checks and balances to make sure that any inappropriate
behavior is identified. And as we know, there have been a
couple of examples where it has identified
inappropriate behavior. Um
It's important that we shine the spotlight on where that's happening and when it's
happening and deal with it. That's why we have re-implemented the checks
and balances that were removed to identify behavior
that can impact on our trust and confidence.
And
then of course, there's integrity training that we are fairly close to rolling out
across the entire organization just to remind our staff about
expectations and standards,
and accountability, and that applies to everybody.
Whatever role we have in this lease, whatever our length of service or rank,
we are all the same, and it's a chance for us to
remind the entire organization of what those expectations are.
So
that's in summary where we're at.
The executive monitor it frequently,
and I'm pleased so far with the progress that we have made.
It has required some extra investment in terms of our
IT, time, and effort. I've also surged extra resource
into our national integrity unit to ensure that they have the
resources to deal with the increase in volume of work,
and to position them for the future.
And as an executive, we are absolutely determined to
ensure that events over the last year don't
impact on trust and confidence and I'm absolutely delighted
that it's back up into the 70s from where it was,
and it's now tracking in the right direction.
I'm so determined to make sure we continue to be better that
I've set a target of 80%
trust and confidence in New Zealand Police by 2029.
Thank you.
All right. Good. I've got a supplementary from Tamatha Paul.
Thank you for that context, Commissioner. That's super helpful.
My question is more to the minister because it's around the budget allocations for
the Independent Police Conduct Authority and what there is and what there isn't.
So,
last month it was reported around the IPCA
and the implications of the multi-year budget freeze that they currently
have. So as it stands, they
have the capacity to investigate about one in
50 police complaints that they receive, despite the
fact that in the last year the number of complaints they received has gone up by
9%. In the year before that, there was another increase of 9%.
The year before that, it was an increase in 6%.
The year before that it was an increase in 8%.
So as we can see, the number of police complaints are increasing, but the
IPCA has a multi-year budget freeze.
In addition to that,
we also don't have a lot of detail in this budget around the new
Inspector General of Police and how that's going to be set up and how that's
meant to crossover with the IPCA.
Let's do two questions.
So my question is,
how are you meant to build trust and integrity and confidence within the
police when the IPCA are not getting increased budget for the increased
complaints they're getting? And where is your budget provisions for the Inspector
General of Police?
Well, I think without a doubt, police are building trust with the
public.
But I think that the police have internal measures that the
commissioner just spoke about, the additional investment into the Police Integrity
Unit.
IPCA has always been very good at triaging-
Inspector General of Police
... and going through complaints that they receive.
Inspector General of Police.
They take them seriously.
And as part of that triaging process, they will
attach a status in terms of the level of investigation or
resource that goes into it. It doesn't come under my
vote.
Hearing.
It's under Justice.
But the
police have got a very good, strong working relationship with them.
They understand their statutory responsibilities and
the public should feel confident that we live in a country
where
really we don't have issues around corruption.
We're very open, we're very transparent.
They're able to make complaints and bring concerns forward, and they're taken
seriously.
And on that Inspector General of Police, how is that progressing?
So that is something that is still going through a Cabinet process.
But obviously, everyone has been very clear that we want to see that put in
place,
so that we avoid the situation we had to deal with through the IPCA complaint,
findings that were released at the end of last year.
Will the legislation come this term?
Probably not this term. We'll have to wait and see, but we will get clearance.
Okay, we're going to go back to Honorable Ginny Andersen.
Thank you very much. The recent Public Service Commission performance
improvement review stated that police has historically under-invested
in finance, asset management, technology, risk and
assurance, and that these weaknesses are now constraining service
delivery. It appears that the issue is not whether the efficiencies should be
pursued, but whether police has enough capability to identify where
savings can be made safely without weakening governance, control, and
long-term sustainability. Given that there's quite a few IT
projects that are just being funded out of savings and aren't
baseline, do you have any comment on your long-term sort of plan on baselining
those big projects that are needed?
Well, I think the government has been very clear.
This is not a one-off approach. This is us saying
that we're going to make sure that we have a public service that is
modern and can meet the needs of the future for our country in the
next decade, two decades, three decades.
That's an enormous piece of work that's going on across government with chief
executive and executive leadership teams to work out how we
can actually deliver a world-class public service that is efficient
and is sustainable into the future. And that is the work that's being done.
So across frontline delivery, the Police Infringement Management Solution,
or the ticketing or the PIMS and capital investment, does the
current vote now reflect The real ongoing cost of
that service, or is police still relying on temporary funding
mechanisms and rephasing rather than fully settling it
in baseline?
Well, I think as a government, we're making heavy investments, not just in
police, but across the entire justice sector,
so that they can provide the best world-class services on
the frontline to the public that expect them.
And that means an ongoing program of investment in both IT
and infrastructure.
Maybe you want to ask someone to help out, because the question I asked is,
is police relying on temporary funding mechanisms for PIMS
or is it baselined? That's the question.
Commissioner.
Did you hear that, Commissioner?
Yeah. It's in and out a
wee bit, but I'll keep talking and hopefully I can answer what I think I hear.
Is the PIMS out of baseline funding or out
of other funding?
Oh, okay. That question I'll need to go to Andrea for.
And I can talk more broadly about
one of the things that drops out of the performance improvement review
is the need to develop a longer term capability plan for
police. We've never done this before, but it's a 10-year plan
that allows us to look at all the different components, as I said earlier, the
corporate side of our organization that supports frontline policing.
The capability plan for 10 years will say, over that period of
time, where does the investment need to sit? What is it that we need to do?
And that work has already begun. We've already taken on board
very skilled workers, and we're learning from Defense who did this, and others to
say, "Well, what does that look like for the police?"
And Andrea or Mike, are you in a position to
answer the PIMS question?
We're just talking about maybe bringing Matt forward, but
the government has provided money for PIMS.
But if you want to bring Matt forward to, yeah.
Sure. So there's two halves to the infringements platform and the
money that's required. One's the build and implementation side, and the second is
the run costs. So the temporary funding that we've got is for the build.
And then the run cost, what we're actually doing is consolidating some of our
technology platforms. So we've already got the run costs to cover that
in baseline.
So baseline going forward-
Yes
... PIMS will be covered.
The operational costs of PIMS going forward are covered already in our baseline.
Okay, that's what I wanted to hear.
What work has police done to identify the full cost to serve frontline
policing and its supporting systems?
And how confident are you that the current baseline funding is
sufficient once all of those temporary cost pressure
supports
fall away? And that would include your wages.
Andrea, do you want to step in?
Sure. I'm happy to step in. So, there is funding, obviously, in Budget
'26 that you've highlighted, which is our further top of our cost pressure
funding. The minister referenced in his opening speech that we will be
developing a police capability plan.
And so the reason for that cost-pressure funding being time-limited is that
aligns with the development of our capability plan.
And so we can bring that forward, which will highlight those strategic choices and
the investment choices for government on the long term.
And that will cover kind of all of our infrastructure, people capability,
wages aspects.
So we are working, started work on that now.
We will be modeling that largely on the defense capability plan, noting that it's
our sort of version one,
and informing bringing that through in the next year or so to inform future
investments.
And once that capability plan is done, should the committee
expect further reprioritization or adjustment
once that's done?
Those will be the choices highlighted in the capability plan for
investment decisions.
There are choices in there about which capability we want to invest in for police,
both personnel capability and infrastructure.
Thank you. And minister, just one last time, because this is really important.
Could you please explain why police wages
are time-limited funding?
Well,
look, the way that the police have handled collective agreements is that
we have provided money in the budget, and they will make decisions themselves
through the bargaining process whether or not they
want to use additional money within baseline.
But why is it time-limited?
It's as simple as that.
Why is it time-limited?
Well, that would be-
It's your choice as the minister whether they do that
... No, that would be
police's decision through the bargaining-
No, it's your decision as the minister
... group, and I'm not the speaker.
It's your decision as the minister.
Okay, now there's a bit there.
You can say something as much as you want.
Right, okay.
It doesn't make it true.
I'm now going to Jamie Arbuckle.
Thank you, Minister. In your opening address, you talked about
gangs, and I'm interested what assurance you can give to New
Zealanders that the '26, '27 budget will
keep tackling gangs and the formation of gangs and
their membership. And obviously concerned about gang
crime. So what's happening in the budget going forward?
Yeah, so I think the whole country can see how effective the police have been
in planning for and implementing and enforcing the new gang legislation that
became available to them.
It has fundamentally changed
the way gangs operate in New Zealand.
You don't see them, they're no longer high profile in communities,
intimidating people.
It's been a step change, and I think even some of the opponents to the legislation
have come out and said it's even creating social change within gangs
because they're actually questioning themselves why are they a member of a
gang. And in my view, especially every gang member that has children,
if they choose to leave the gang environment, which we know intergenerationally
does so much damage and harm, and rejoin society in a positive way, then that is
hugely positive for us as a country.
So, we will continue to
target gangs.
It's pretty obvious that our objective is to make Being a gang member
in New Zealand, a very difficult and hard thing to be.
At the moment in prison, we've probably got a significant amount of
gang leaders in there, and the police have been highly effective.
And they're going into communities now that are actually asking for help,
that have had gang problems, highly visible gang
problems, for decades. And they're going in there and they're running operations,
and they've been very effective. And they're basically cutting out that rotten
core
at the heart of it. We will try and rehabilitate those people through the
corrections system, but it gives the community a bit of a breather and allows
the ability to reset.
And so I'm really proud of the work the police have been doing.
That will be ongoing.
Just a supplementary. The units that have been set up to
deal with gangs, they've maintained.
Are they something that we need to put more resource into?
Yeah, no, we've stood up additional gang
units, obviously alongside the
PEAK units. And by the way, all of these units will work across purposes as
well. If there's a requirement somewhere, then they'll be pulled in for more
resource to go and support one another.
But I don't know if the deputy or the commissioner wanted to speak to that.
Yeah, I can probably speak to that, I think, Minister.
We're certainly very proud of the progress we've made since November 2024, and
we've had over 140 patches seized.
We've had
620 plus other items of insignia seized,
over 1,140 charges that are relevant to the legislation from
November.
I don't just think about a gang disruption unit, of which 77 of the
500 resources are dedicated to, I think about 10,500 sworn
officers who are out there and have really embraced the legislation and are doing
an incredible job. And as the minister has said, that's for
all and sundry to see the difference that that has made.
And
in terms of
funding and how does that continue to enable us, well, it's business as
usual now. And
every day we see across the country frontline staff
embracing the legislation and dealing with issues that present, and their job is to
enforce the law and that's not going to change.
All right, now I've got a couple of supps on this. One from Ginny Andersen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So my numbers have police
at
10,528
and still more gang members at 10,544.
Any views on the fact that we still have more gang members than police officers
under your watch?
I think the gang members are far better controlled now under this watch, there's no
doubt about that.
How about police officers?
I think they feel far more uncomfortable under this government than they did in the
previous one. And the good news is that we're seeing gang numbers
trending down, not trending up. So it's a good news story.
You guys should be very happy. I'm sure you're regretting not supporting the
gang legislation.
And you did-
All right. Now I'm going to Todd Stevenson.
Sorry, Rima Nakley's got a supplementary.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Chair. And Commissioner, thank you.
Just
with regard to the answer you just gave.
With the ban on gang patches, there was a lot of
concern from some members about how the police are going to cope
and the resources, et cetera. What
have you been hearing from your police force with respect to
this
gang patch ban and the implementation of it
and the effects of it?
Yeah. Well, thank you.
Yeah. And my view is-
Thank you for the question. I-
Oh, sorry.
Sorry. Go on.
Sorry. Are you going to-
You want to go, Commissioner, you go. You go, Bill.
Yeah.
Okay. Look, I spend a lot of time out there in the field, as
do my executive colleagues, and the feedback that we constantly get is that
frontline staff have really embraced and are feeling very empowered by the
legislation. It has allowed them to do their job even better
for New Zealanders. So
it's inspired them, it's empowered them, and the results speak
for themselves, and that certainly won't be changing.
They are very happy with how things are tracking, and so is the executive.
Thank you, Commissioner. And Minister, of course, I'd love to hear what you were
about to say. While I'm drinking from my police cup.
I think the Commissioner's covered it.
Look, me personally, I just felt like we had reached a bit of a
watershed moment for us as a country.
When you go back two and a half years ago, and I was shocked to see gang members
taking over provincial towns,
schools having to close,
members of the community unable to use roads because they were closed.
And I thought, "What are we coming to as a country?" And
so obviously the introduction of the gang legislation,
you worry about it because you
think, "How is this going to play out in terms of the
potential?" Was there to be some conflict between gang members and
police? And we don't want to see that.
But I felt very strongly, too, that if the police didn't have tools to be able to
roll back over the gangs and clearly demonstrate and show to the public of New
Zealand that they were controlling our streets and not the gangs, then
we were in a death spiral, and it was going to get
worse. And so the police proved and showed
everyone that they had deep capability.
They had the ability to plan for it, they had the ability to deploy, and they
had the ability to enforce. And
none of those concerns or fears materialized, which was great.
And you can see how positive it's been for us as a country.
Yeah.
Right. Now, members, we've got half an hour. I'm going to shake it up.
I've got-
Because I'm very conscious about Ms.
Chang sitting there from the Serious Fraud Office.
So I've got two people who want to question you.
I'm going to start off with Camilla Belich, and then I'm going to Todd Stevenson.
I've still got another primary after that.
Yeah, I'm aware.
Thank you. Thanks for being here. I want to talk about an area of
crime which has been increasing,
probably the fastest, according to the Serious Fraud Office, fastest growing
area of crime, which is fraud and deception.
In
The
budget bids under this government, the Serious Fraud Office's
budgets have either not grown or been reduced, and in this budget, they've
also been reduced. So what is the gov--
first to you, to the minister, and then we've got to hear some comments from
the Serious Fraud Office as well.
Yeah. So-
What is the government doing to target this
growing area of crime which is affecting, with growth in technology, more
and more New Zealanders?
Yeah. So full recognition, very good question.
And I will pass to the director, and thank you for the question because
often we come here with the Serious Fraud Office, and we go through the entire
hearing without actually getting a question.
So it's nice that they can actually-- it gives the director a chance to talk about
the work that they have been doing over the last two and a half years, which is
impressive.
Fundamentally,
we are not immune to the rest of the world when you see
risk around corruption,
risk around people wanting to
commit fraud, and even
abuse government processes and systems themselves.
And
this has been highlighted, and I see our Serious Fraud Office, of course, they have
to deal with, their name obviously indicates the serious fraud.
They're also our insurance policy, as a country, to
protect us against those types of things, to make sure that we stay at the top of
the table in terms of being a country that enjoys the fact that we have very
low levels of corruption.
But we can't ignore it. And
so maybe with that note, I'll pass over to the director so she can actually
talk to some of the initiatives, some of the things that they've been doing.
Yes, they have been included
across the public service in terms of how do we look at
modernizing, how do we look at being sustainable into the future.
But also, I am conscious that they're a small agency, and that
the targets that are set, no decisions have been made.
We'll be consulting and working on making sure that we achieve our
goals as a government as having a more efficient public service, whilst at the
same time being able to deliver quality front-facing
public services. So with that, director.
Thank you for that question. Yes, of course, in this climate, we
need to absorb the cost pressures that come from inflation, but also
because our operating environment is increasing exponentially,
as you've mentioned. And so we are
proactively looking into ways to mitigate that and still provide
high impact work. For instance, leveraging technology,
AI, machine learning, digitization of
tools. We
have been trialing a number of different types of AI
tools. And we were one of the first agencies
to roll out an AI policy to ensure that we're forward-leaning.
Together with that, we've also focused on high impact
initiatives. So for instance, last year,
we rolled out the first ever national
campaign to raise awareness around foreign bribery and also introduced
an encrypted end-to-end tool where whistleblowers can
anonymously report such sensitive types of offending.
We also lead the anti-corruption task force together with the
police and the Public Service Commission, which was a prevention
initiative to raise the capability in the public sector.
So absolutely, we're very conscious of the resource
constraints, but we are proactive in both
mitigating that, but also finding opportunities
to continue to deliver in that climate.
They've rolled out some very proactive programs that actually their counterparts
overseas are looking at very closely. Yeah.
Thank you. I suppose, though, when we look at
one of the things that the Serious Fraud Office has reported to us
in the standard estimates questions is that staff
turnover has increased from 14%
in 2004 to 21% in 2026. And one of
the main reasons that that was reported was
staff moving on to better career opportunities and pay.
Now, isn't this a bit of a concern, Minister, that
skilled people are moving away from the Serious Fraud Office, which is
the agency that we have, which is tasked with targeting
the biggest growing area of crime?
Yes, it is. And you highlighted the issue, is that people
that come and work in the Serious Fraud Office, they're highly sought after in the
private sector for their skills and their experience.
And
so this is the challenge. It's something we talk about.
It's something that we'll continue to look at
into the future, just how can we mitigate that.
But that is the primary reason, is that
the quality of the people, type of work that they do,
the reputation that comes with having worked at the Serious Fraud Office, they're
highly sought after individuals that are headhunted by the private sector.
And those numbers reflect that.
You good now, Mark?
Right, I'm going to Todd Stevenson.
Oh, good. Thank you.
Serious Fraud Office. Small but mighty. That's also my personal motto as well.
I'm assuming you don't have mugs.
Me too.
No. Anyway, look-
It'd be a good one, though.
It would be a good one.
Small but mighty.
Yeah, look, probably more for Karen rather than the minister.
Yeah.
Sure.
Yeah, we've talked about the complexity of fraud.
Obviously, yeah, we had the long-term insights briefing with you.
And a lot of this now is actually online electronic fraud.
And again, we've basically said the budget's flat.
It's pretty flat, yeah.
Pretty flat. But do you have the in-house capabilities to deal with this complexity
now, particularly of digital fraud?
How are you developing that capability? Do you buy it in?
And yeah, what are you kind of planning for the year ahead?
It is an ongoing
risk and challenge because it's a double-edged sword.
On the one hand, perpetrators can leverage technology.
Now digital-enabled fraud is just exploding.
On the flip side, law enforcement has the ability to take
advantage of, as I've just mentioned, technology to assist us
as well. If you look at how small we are, this is the reason
why we've been able to be this small and keep up with the operating
environment. It's not through traditional forms of investigation.
We've had to leverage
machine learning well before it became trendy, through
being able to lift the most important digital evidence in a safe
way. But it is an ongoing challenge
to get ahead and keep and maintain our
capability, because it's not a set and forget type of skill set.
As you probably know, every day there's a new type of iPhone
that is
released and new apps, and this sort of
certification is highly sought after.
And we take it as a compliment that our people are
sought after by private sector and also overseas.
In New Zealand, very few people have this sort of expertise, and so
we often have to grow our own. And we have some of the most
excellent technical people in the field, which we're very proud of.
Having said that, it is
one of the things that does keep me up at night, around how do we keep
ahead of this booming technology curve.
We also host an electronic forensics club
funding. So being the center of excellence at the SFO,
and recognizing that there's very few of these
experts in New Zealand, we actually service other
agencies such as MSD, FMA, the
Commerce Commission, because it would be inefficient
and probably not feasible for them to grow their own, both in
terms of hardware, software, and capability to do the work that they
need to do. So we're very proud, small and mighty, but we also
provide that-
You want to-
... expertise across the-
Quick
... public sector.
Great. Well, that's quick sum, actually. I was going to ask.
You've kind of partially asked, so that's great.
Obviously, you're center of excellence.
But then, yeah, do you also
look at what other capabilities, say, the police or other enforcement agencies
have? Are you benchmarking yourself against them or...
Yeah, how do you kind of decide, yeah, who's got the
expertise and, yeah, do you share resources?
Absolutely. I'd like to say that over the last few years, the
relationship between those agencies that carry those
expertise has been closer than ever with the Serious Fraud Office.
So it depends on what type of expertise you're talking about.
So Customs has particular-
Yeah
... digital forensics expertise, which they are involved in our club
funding, pooling of those resources.
We are very conscious around information-sharing agreements and
making sure that, because that's often a hurdle as well in terms of
delays and ability to share information in a lawful
but efficient way. And so we have
gone quite a long way with other agencies to ensure that that can be
increasingly efficient.
And also, we're very engaged with the
FIU at police in terms of the huge
volumes of data that come through
their
area through the anti-money laundering
regulations.
And we've had a number of secondments
with these agencies to ensure that we can do that more
seamlessly. So actually, one of our detection intelligence officer
is actually seconded part-time to the FIU to facilitate that,
and that's really returned some significant-
So, Commissioner, please.
Yeah, look, if I may just give you an example of the hard work that we do with the
SFO, but also with other law enforcement overseas.
So one of the things we did today here in London at the Five Eyes
event is that we invited also to the table the leaders of
law enforcement from France, the Netherlands, Germany, and
Europol, as well as industry leads, Meta, Google, and
Microsoft. We were all in the room today for the whole day, working
out what can we do better together to keep our respective countries
safe. Because if we think that the solution to
the fastest growing crime type in New Zealand, which is
not unique to New Zealand, by the way, it's a global issue.
But if we think that we have the answers on our own shores, then we are not
optimizing that opportunity that sits offshore.
So today, as a good example, is to say, "Well, how can we
leverage the capabilities of other organizations? What are they doing?
What skills do we need to think about and how can we share?" So I think
it's probably a good example of what Karen and I do
globally to try and deal with the increasing demand
in this crime type.
All right. Thank you for that. And I thought you got it very light there,
but now we're going to get back to police matters.
So, Honorable Ginny Andersen, we're back with you.
Thank you. Minister, Budget 2026 says that law and order
agencies are excluded from-
You've got the ear
... the budget baseline savings. Why is police not
excluded from the public service department reduction in FTEs?
Well, police is the same. All of the, right across the
public service, and I'll say it again,
is that this government's focus is on making sure that we've got a
world-class, efficient public service for New Zealand that
is sustainable.
And that is the work that is going on currently across government.
No, but you didn't answer my question.
So the budget said that law and order are excluded, but
then police, I guess, is it non-sworn, are included.
Why are they included if no law and order is excluded?
Well, no. We've always been very clear that
frontline services are excluded.
We continue-
But not frontline
... We'll continue to invest in the frontline services and public-facing services
and where we need to make the investment.
But-
But yes, we've been very clear that
everyone else is expected to look at how we provide a modern,
efficient public service.
So does that mean we can expect further cuts to non-sworn roles within
police?
Well, I don't know. That's something that the police will work through
themselves.
Can I put it to you that you might be funding some of the IT projects that haven't
been funded, like your fingerprinting system,
through laying off more non-sworn-
Well, I wish they had been funded. There
was no funding really that was going into IT systems or infrastructure
Still isn't
We are changing that. The police are actually coming up with developing very good
plans and
around the future investment into those things.
Our non-sworn staff are no less important than our sworn staff.
They're an integral part of the police organization.
But I'd say again that as a public service- ...
as a public service or as a government, we have been really clear with the
country that we want a modernized, efficient-
Mm-hmm
... public service.
Right. Commissioner, I see you've got your hand up.
Yes. Look, if I can just correct
a couple of things. So the police are excluded from budget cuts, and
we are also excluded from FTE cuts.
What we are not excluded from is the expectation that as a public
service agency, we continue to look for efficiencies and to
reinvest. But we are excluded from the budget
cuts, and we are excluded from the FTE cuts.
We are continuing to do work about how we could better reinvest in other parts
of policing. That's just good practice, and we'll continue to do that.
Thank you very much for that clarification.
So to the fingerprinting,
have you got funding, or do you intend to renew
or update the fingerprinting
technology that was warned two years ago was so old that it might
compromise public safety?
That's ABIS.
Yeah. We're investing into that. That's right. Should've been done earlier.
You are investing into that, sorry?
Yeah.
Okay. Yeah. Where-
Should've been done earlier
Where is that in the budget? Can you point to the line in the budget where that
funding occurs?
That's ABIS. So the ABIS budget line is the-
Yeah
... update of the fingerprint system.
Thank you. And how much is in that?
That is held in tag contingency while we go through the commercials for
upgrade of the system.
Right. Okay.
I'm pleased with where we're at but-
And so when you come up with that plan of how you're going to future plan, that's
part of that, is it?
So we'll work through the next phases.
So the next phases, we will need to go through the business casing for the
drawdown, and that will highlight the cost.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Are you right with that?
I do have one more question.
Is it new or on that?
Well, it's kind of in relation. It is tied to that.
Okay. Well, just finish that one off.
Can you see that there's a problem with transparency when there's no
line-by-line amounts provided for some significant IT
projects that are requiring investment, and you're taking
this out of time-limited funding and underspends in previous years?
And even reports on your accountabilities are saying that this is not
good future planning for police, and even the fact that
we as a committee examining the budgets now still don't have
your future plan to understand how that shapes down.
Well, you need to read the plan properly because you obviously-
We haven't got the plan, Minister
Well, your previous
question showed that you hadn't read it properly because the money-
It's just that you don't have the plan
There is-
Minister, finish
... there was money allocated, but it's commercially sensitive, and it will
be made available
at the appropriate time, but that is commercially sensitive.
The budget. Now's a good time.
Yeah. When they're building, what we've done is we've funded and we've
committed to building in a system that should've been done earlier.
Okay.
So if you read the documents properly, you'll see that.
I've read them carefully.
Right. Now we're going to go-- thank you for that.
We're now going to a new line of questioning from Mr. Cave.
Thank you very much, Chair. Minister, there's been a huge amount of work that's
gone into retail crime and ensuring that we reduce
retail crime,
across New Zealand, including across the provinces.
Does the 2026 budget continue that
support for a focus on reducing retail crime?
Yeah, absolutely. So we have got a massive focus on particularly
initially violent retail crime. We've seen that trend down.
And we've seen an overall positive trend in terms of retail
crime. Still a lot of work to go. Don't make no mistake.
We've still got a long way to go, but we're definitely making good inroads in
something as simple as the back-to-basics approach that has been
taken around the delivery of beat teams.
They have a massive positive impact on retail crime.
And so, Minister, the $480 million that was committed
in budget 2025 over four years, has that continued to
flow into this budget, in terms of supporting
frontline policing so that those beat teams can occur
in places like Whanganui and across the country?
Sure. So yes, the 120 million per annum that was confirmed in the previous budget
round is an ongoing funding into our baseline.
Great.
We're still announcing, we're still delivering new beat teams.
Fantastic.
Yeah.
And so we'll see more announcements around beat teams across the country?
Yes. Yeah. Well, it's operational.
It's got the-
I've got one more on this one
... Commissioner that-
Yes
... there's, yeah.
Last.
Yeah. If I can just maybe mention that take last
week, New Plymouth confirmed its permanent establishment
of their beat team. That also has a focus on
retail crime.
And there'll be more to come around the country, and they've been a huge success
because it is back to basics. It's doing exactly what we should continue to
do well in our country. Just on retail crime, so I've set an
internal target of an increase of 15% in retail crime resolutions
by January 2027. We're already sitting at 14%, and
I think that just reflects the hard work that's going on at the front line to
hold those accountable that are breaking the law in the retail community.
And so, Commissioner, to be clear In terms of outcomes, the
investment into those beat teams and the retail crime focus
is delivering positive outcomes for our communities
in terms of reduction of crime
Outstanding results. The feedback that we continue to get from the retail
community, but also just Kiwis across the country, is they love seeing their police
officers out and about on foot doing
what we do so well, and that's being visible across the country.
So outstanding results and I constantly get good
feedback. And that is all connected to,
I believe, one of the reasons we've had an increase in trust and confidence.
Thank you.
And the police officers love it as well.
They get to get out in the community. They get to understand where the issues are.
They build relationships with retailers, with their employees, with community
groups. It's just a really positive way of policing.
Thank you. Tamatha, have you got more?
A new line?
Yeah, a new line.
I do. Probably be my last question, seeing 12 minutes left.
I asked you this in your capacity as Minister of Corrections earlier in the week,
but
on policing,
the
Justice Ministry put out a really good report this year
around the disproportionality of wāhine Māori throughout the
criminal justice system.
There's some data in here around half of women
proceeded against by police are Māori women, despite
Māori women only making up 15% of the population.
70% of that disproportionality can be explained in terms of previous
offending or the seriousness of the offense, but 30% of that cannot be explained.
So building on this theme that I've questioned you about all term
around systemic bias and systemic racism, how do we
explain this disproportionality against Māori women?
Okay, but within the context of the budget.
Yeah.
Yeah, look, I've been really clear that
I do not accept that there is systemic
bias or racism
either in our police service or our corrections service.
I believe that 99.9% of our officers
serve without fear or favor,
and they're color blind. And it's very easy to say there's systemic
racism.
If you can bring forward genuine examples of that-
I just did
... No.
I just-
No, I mean-
The 30% is unexplained
... it's very easy to have a broad brush and just say because
Māori are overrepresented. We all know that, and we all want to try and fix it, and
we want to address it.
To you.
That is not a policing issue or a corrections issue.
I didn't ask.
That is, if you actually want to really talk about the issue, is why
are they-- Let's go right back in and identify why they're actually
offending and why they're coming into the criminal justice system.
That's where we want to stop the-
They're coming into it because the police are proceeding against them
... That's where we want to make the invest-- No, that's where we want to make the
investment. That's where we want them to be able to reach their potential and take
advantage of the opportunities that our country provides.
But they're not making those decisions. They're making bad decisions.
So the police then have to respond to that.
The corrections don't decide who goes into corrections.
That is the judiciary that decides that.
But what we need to do, if we want to get really serious about it, and this is what
social investment is, it's going right back and saying, "Right,
why are these people over-representative?" There's going to be social issues
sitting there, might be
intergenerational gang membership.
It could be their socioeconomic situation.
It could be a whole raft of reasons. It's complex.
Those are the issues that we've got to be determined to address, not point the
finger and blame the police-
Okay, no
... for our problems or the corrections.
Within the con-
That is not, I assure you, that is not where the problem lies.
We should be proud of our police force.
They do serve without fear or favor. They are color blind.
When we do get someone that doesn't hold to the values of the New Zealand police,
the police are very quick to act on that.
So I just reject outright that this spruiking of
this whole narrative around that we've got a biased and racist police service
or corrections service, we don't.
So within the context of the budget, Tamatha. Have you got another question?
Oh, no. Well, there's no answer, right?
Okay. I've got a-
You've got no answer.
No, we just disagree.
What was the 30%?
We just disagree. We just disagree on this.
Okay, I'm not going to-- I've got a further supplementary.
Well, the 30%-
It doesn't relate to the budget
... that you're talking about is that there's 30% more offending happening.
So we need to identify what are the drivers of that offending, and we need to
fix that. That is-
Okay, I've got a supplementary from Camilla Belich.
Just on that point, Minister, why is the Ministry of Justice, which I
appreciate is your ministry, but is obviously-
It is
... part of the same area, why is it
investing in a program, disproportionality of
Māori program, if there isn't an issue in relation to the
disproportionality of Māori-
I'm not saying it's not an issue
... using the correction system
... We all recognize the issue. I agree with you
that there's an issue there. I'm not
blind to the issue. What I'm saying to you is that pointing the finger at the
police and the corrections and blaming them for the issue is not the
solution to this. The solution is going back and actually identifying
why are these people coming to the notice or starting to enter into
the criminal justice system. I did-
It's all we ask
... That's what social invest-
All we ask you to-
That's what social investment is.
And I'd encourage you to look at what we're trying to achieve through
social investment. That is quite simply, as a country and as a government,
looking to see where we can make the best investment early
on to allow people to reach their potential.
Yep.
And not come into the criminal justice system.
Okay.
That is how we can make the biggest tick change.
Right now, we're going to go to a new topic, hopefully within the context of the
budget.
Honorable Julie Anne Genter.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. We've seen really big increases
in methamphetamine, and I note too that cocaine
consumption surpassed MDMA for the first time in wastewater
testing.
How much of Budget '26 goes towards tools for police to combat organized
crime in terms of drug
distribution and networks?
I'll let Andrea speak to To that or the
commissioner.
But I'd just say that we've never had as big a focus on transnational crime,
organized crime,
and gangs in New Zealand. We're working with both, but the commissioner and
I have made sure that we've strengthened our relationship with Australia.
It's never been in a stronger position it is at the moment.
We're doing lots of joint work with them.
Our relationship with the Pacific has never been as strong as what it currently is
through the commissioner's work.
He has dedicated a lot of time and spent a lot of time up there, with a big
focus on methamphetamine and contraband.
We are being targeted without a doubt.
And yes, we've seen an increase in both methamphetamine and cocaine,
and we want to get on top of that problem.
And a lot of the work that we're doing is laser focused on doing
that. But in terms of proportionality and to-
Yeah
... or other measures. Commissioner, do you want to speak to that?
Yeah. Look, thanks, minister. You've summed it up quite nicely.
I have spent a tremendous amount of time building relationships with my
colleagues across the Pacific,
because frankly, what we're seeing in the Pacific region is too big
for any single nation to deal with, and I include Australia and New Zealand in
that. So, the time that I've spent with police commissioners and chiefs from
across the Pacific,
and as well with other organizations within countries like the
French Navy, the Colombian Navy,
Royal Australian Navy, also the Colombian National Police.
And we're delighted to have received the funding to establish a post in
Bogotá, Colombia, all designed to
address the supply of cocaine at source.
And there are other initiatives, obviously, that
we're doing with customs, Australian Federal Police, Australian
Border Force. So,
that all costs time and money, but it's worth it because the
increase that we have seen in methamphetamine and cocaine
coming into our country, we are only going to be able to tackle that if we work
with law enforcement outside of our country as well.
That's probably all on that.
Thank you. That's really helpful to understand.
But reports we get, particularly through the Pay the Risk campaign, is that many
frontline police are really stretched, having to deal with far
more extreme and dangerous situations as a direct
result of the increased levels of methamphetamine they have to deal with on
a daily basis. Is there any injection in this budget to
assist frontline police officers deal with more dangerous and
more extreme situations as a result of this meth uptake?
Perhaps if I could give an example of Operation Phoenix, which is
an operation that we terminated just last week.
No, I didn't want a--
The question I asked was, what additional resource is going in to assist frontline
to deal with more extreme situations?
I didn't want a particular operation, just frontline resource that is-
No
... at stretch.
Okay. No, I was going to use an example to demonstrate that.
So, the funding support that we've had has
resulted in the gang disruption units, increases in our asset recovery
teams,
all of those supporting assets,
which, yeah, they're complex operations. They take time.
But that is all designed to deal with the criminal networks that are inflicting
the pain across our country. Now, we hope, of course, that the difference that
makes for our frontline police is it reduces the threats and it holds offenders to
account, including gang members.
So, it may not appear direct initially, but of course, all
that work does make a difference. And in terms of Operation Phoenix, that's
in the Far North community because we think a year ago, and we heard about the
stories coming out of Kai I Tai and Kaikohe and what have you, and
that's a consequence of us responding to the threat to those communities.
Do you have any sort of view in terms of what future capability police will
need to try and get ahead of this trend?
It seems like there are record levels of profits being made
by gangs now. While they might have been driven underground, they're still very
active. What do you think we need in New Zealand to get ahead of this trend
and equip our police to be able to try and combat it?
Look, that's a very good question.
I'm very proud of the work that my asset recovery staff do in the
year. So far to date, $96 million has been seized and put
into the Proceeds of Crime fund. But if I think about where investment
needs to continue, it is in our effort offshore, with law
enforcement outside of our country.
It is into technology as well to ensure that we have the
tools to be able to
exploit and target criminal networks.
We can't do that on our own. That has to be with some of our international
partners as well and industry. So, we are continually looking
for opportunities to be better for our country.
And I am very pleased with the progress that we have made.
But yes, of course, we are disappointed with the increase in methamphetamine and
cocaine that's appearing in our wastewater, and therein lies the challenge ahead of
us.
If I can give the member a little bit of reassurance
that the police are better funded,
they're highly focused,
and New Zealand is a safer place than it was
two and a half years ago. So we should be very proud of them.
It's through their outstanding leadership, the work their frontline officers are
doing, supported by our non-sworn, through the whole organization,
and I'm very, very proud. When you look around the rest of the world,
our New Zealand police, I believe, are leading the way.
Thank you. So a lot of the information I've seen is that there's been a shift to
more online sales for drug dealing,
dark web or online platforms that are
encrypted. What work does police have underway to enable
police officers, those detectives who are investigating those networks, to be
able to look into those spaces where criminal organizations have
shifted?
Well, I think there's an expectation, Commissioner, you might
answer that.
Minister's tipped.
Did you hear that?
Yeah, I got half of
the question. Sorry, could you repeat the question?
Just briefly again, yeah.
So there's been a shift in the way criminal networks are operating to be more
online, whether that be encrypted or on the dark web.
What investment or what tools are police presently using
to enable policing to happen in that space as well as in
real life?
Oh, look, absolutely, and this is why we put so much work into
working with industry partners, some of the big tech providers.
It's also leveraging the Five Eyes network.
That's exactly why I'm here in London trying to understand what other law
enforcement agencies are doing that will help us in New Zealand.
We continue to leverage also Interpol, Europol,
in terms of their own capabilities.
Because if we think that we will make a difference in the very space you mentioned
on our own, then we're kidding ourselves. We won't.
Other nations are doing a great job.
We're doing a great job, and we pool our effort, and that's why I spend a
tremendous amount of time working with law enforcement partners.
And last question. What do you put down to the sharp increase of cocaine in
the wastewater testing, and
what's your view on what that means for law enforcement in New Zealand
communities?
Oh, sure. Look, New Zealand and Australia is
a lucrative market, there's no doubt about that.
So criminal networks will exploit our country if there's any
opportunity. And I frequently talk about the enablers of
organized criminal activity. That's violence, it's technology, it's
corruption.
And for now, a lot of the cocaine, most of the
cocaine that's coming our way is coming out of South America.
That's why we're putting a post into Colombia.
We need to work more closely with the French.
Of the 17 tons of cocaine that's been taken off the Pacific
this year, they've intercepted 14 tons of that.
So we need to continue to work outside of our country to keep our own
place safe.
But fundamentally, it comes down to New Zealand being a lucrative
market for organized criminal networks.
Okay.
And that's why they keep coming to our place.
Very last question to Rima Nakli.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair. So with respect to organized crime,
so organized crime, would you say, is another term for gang
activity and gang organizations?
Yeah, they're part of it, yeah.
And so Minister, and if you want, Commissioner as
well,
well, Minister, with respect to the laws that we've been
passing targeting gangs, would you say that that
would help
with respect to the fight against meth-related harm and
drug-related harm that is so prolific in our beautiful country,
thanks to the gangs?
Yeah, I think it is a really complicated picture around
transnational crime, which is really behind
methamphetamine, cocaine contraband coming into the country.
And that's why those relationships with our partners, with our global
partners are so important.
The Pacific is really buckling under the pressure
of that at the moment. That's why we're putting a lot of attention, a lot of
resource. The Commissioner's spending a lot of time.
We've put more police officers up there to support and help with that.
We've got people up there at the moment.
And of course, back home here, I just want to acknowledge the
SFO, our other law enforcement agencies.
Our
intelligence agencies are all working together
to make sure that we're doing the best that we can to disrupt supply chains,
identify the transnational crime groups, identify
the organized crime groups in New Zealand, and actually targeting them and going
after them. And there's a high level of success there, without a doubt.
Like I said, we've got a large proportion of gang members
currently sitting in our prisons.
And you see just about on a monthly basis,
operations being terminated by police. They take a lot of planning.
There's a lot of dedicated work that goes into those, and they're very successful
in disrupting these criminal networks.
All right. Hey-
Can I-- Can I-
No, no. I think we're going to finish, I think.
Commissioner.
Okay.
He's got a closing point.
That's all right, I think. We're slightly out of time.
Okay.
First of all, I just want to thank the minister, commissioner, and all your staff-
Thank you
... for a wonderful job you do in keeping New Zealand safe.
Also want to acknowledge you, Karen Cheng, for what you do at the
SFO in an increasingly complex world.
So just want to take that opportunity to thank you this morning.
Thank you.
Right.
Thanks.
I'm going to ask you to clear the room as soon as possible because we've got-
I'll go see him
... the Associate Minister of Police coming in.
So whoever needs to stay. Are you staying for that, Deputy Commissioner?
Yes.
Right. Anyone else? Yeah.
Oh,
okay. I'll have that.
Shrink away if you don't want that
water.
Oh, you had to buy it.
Yes.
They don't just give them out willy-nilly.
No.
For me, it's us.
Is the minister out there?
You're staying out. Yeah. Are you
going to come out, or who's...?
We think we're it.
No. It's a public session anyway, so.
Here she is.
Right.
Yeah,
there we go. Thank you.
Right, Minister. Nice to have you here with us this morning.
We've got half an hour with you.
We had such an active session before.
So hopefully some of the questions have been asked, but maybe you can just do some
short introduction and then we'll get straight into the questions.
Excellent. Thank you much. Yeah. As
Associate Minister of Police, I have responsibility for Transnational Organized
Crime Strategy, the Resilience to Organized Crime in Communities, or ROCK
program work, and growing police's frontline.
There is much outstanding work being carried out in each of these
areas, and I thank police officers and staff across the country for their work
keeping our communities safe. New Zealand has great police doing very challenging
work. The coalition government is strongly focused on law and order and making
our communities safer. I'm sure you'll want to ask specific
questions about constabulary numbers, so I'll make a brief comment about the TSOC
work, which now incorporates the ROCK program.
I'm absolutely committed to addressing organized crime because we want to stop its
harm to our people and communities, to our economy, and to our national and
regional security. The ministerial advisory group I set up provided
valuable expert advice on key areas to make real progress in
combating organized crime. This work has helped shape the Transnational
and Serious and Organized Crime Strategy and Action Plan launched in December last
year, which will guide this work over the next five years and sets
out key cross-agency initiatives to improve the response to TSOC.
Solutions developed will involve a whole system response, as it is clear that
this is not and cannot be just a law enforcement problem.
So we're looking at all the levers we can pull and all the agencies and
organizations that contribute to this space.
An example of this is the whole system response,
in response to the illicit tobacco market, bringing Customs,
Police, Health New Zealand, and the Ministry of Health to join forces to
target and dismantle illegal tobacco trade.
The Resilience to Organized Crime in Communities, or ROCK work program, is
part of this multi-agency response also.
I've seen the breadth of work being undertaken through ROCK and have been pleased
to see the program expand, recognizing that the crime landscape in each
region is unique and needs responses that counteract the specific
concerns and use the strengths of specific regions.
What makes ROCK so powerful is it is delivered by locals who are designing
responses within their own communities, and I believe that a sustainable,
stable funding model for ROCK will be important into the future.
Okay, good. First question from the Honorable Jenny Hansen.
You've got responsibility also for delivering the 500.
Could you give us an update on when you estimate reaching 500 more
police?
Excellent. Yes, as we have now more
officers than ever before. On Tuesday, there was
10,506 officers online. We've invested
in police to recruit and retain 500 more police officers.
They've gone about delivering that.
Without our investment and push and our backing of police, it's
highly likely constabulary numbers would have declined.
Certainly, that's what was happening when we first came into government, with no
recruit training going through in the first two months that we were in government.
In Budget 2024, we provided 191 million to fund the
recruitment and retention of 500 more police officers.
There are currently, as I said, 10,506 police officers
and 280 in training. Next week, another 96 constables will
graduate. That means there will be close to 400 more
police than in November 2023.
Thank you.
A total of 1,675 police have graduated from
college since 2023.
Thank you very much. So the numbers for police in May were
10,528. The figure you've given just now,
10,506. Can you confirm that's a reduction in police
numbers from May?
Yeah, and as you'll be aware, there is attrition that occurs on a monthly basis, so
actually on a weekly basis, but our current attrition rate is 4.5%.
Okay. Are you concerned that there are still more gang members, with
10,544, than police officers, and
that gap seems to be growing?
No, I think it's actually a really encouraging sign that we know who our gang
members are, and as we know them, we can control it.
Any strategy needs to have visibility of who we're dealing
with. So I think it's actually a credit to the police that we have more
information, more knowledge of who our gang members are so we can target them
better. I don't think it's an indication of gangs being out of control.
I think it shows that we have much greater visibility and control over our gangs.
Do you have, given that trajectory of how police numbers sort of grow and then sort
of dip a bit with attrition, do you have a projected date where you think you're
going to actually reach that 500 that you promised to
reach in November last year?
Yeah. I think the current figures, if our attrition rate stays at
4.5%, will be in October this year.
In October. Do you have a date or just a when?
No, just-
You don't know when it might be
... yeah. And as you can appreciate with attrition fluctuating
at the 4.5%, we believe it'll be in October this year.
Do you sort of look back now into that coalition agreement where there was a
promise made for 500 in two years? Do you sort of look back on that and understand
why did you make that promise to New Zealanders when it wasn't
able to be achieved?
I think it was an absolutely positive thing to do for policing, to give
it that level of priority, that level of energy and commitment.
It drove a lot of decisions and actions.
We've got the Auckland training facility.
We've cranked up the police college to put more through college.
We introduced the 20-week training course.
We did a whole lot of things to improve standards, improve our
pipeline. I think we've got over 1,100 in the pipeline at the moment applying
to join the police. And we've seen record numbers of police
returning. So I think that energy and focus into it was a really good initiative.
Just one more one now.
All right. Okay.
Can you see that it might undermine the trust and confidence in the
public if the government promises to deliver 500 more police and then
fails to do so? Do you think that future promises might not be
taken seriously if you're not able to deliver on those?
No, I think the trust and confidence in the public, especially in the law and order
space, has been outstanding, and that we saw that just at Mystery Creek with
the tens of thousands of people that went through the police tent engaging in the
opportunity to see if they could meet it.
I think there is real positive impact on the fact that, A, we haven't compromised
standards, but B, we have grown police numbers.
So just on that point, minister, and maybe it's a question for the commissioner,
but
in terms of compromising standards, uh My understanding is there's
been a change in the qualification required to become a
constable. And could you perhaps just tell us about what that's
meant for the length of time to process people through
our police academy, and also within the context
of your budget of 191 million extra money that you put up?
Yeah. I think to clarify, it wasn't a compromise in standards.
It was the fact that we wanted to ensure that every police officer went through
college, passed every requirement that was needed to be done.
And the commissioner, I'm sure will want to answer it, but that was about verifying
that everything that was required of a police officer before they graduated college
was completed.
There has been no compromising of recruitment standards.
But I think the training process, in order to meet previous targets,
there had been some flexibility in that space, and the commissioners did a great
job to tidy that up.
Commissioner, do you want to add anything to that or?
Oh, yes. If I can just add a wee bit. Yes, I did make an early decision
that actually I was not happy that
some were being allowed to become police officers in our country, having not
completed some of the standards that were expected of them.
So, I brought in an expectation that
there would be no drop in standards, that New Zealanders deserve the
best possible policemen and women that they could have.
Has that meant that it's taken a little bit more time to work through that?
Yes, it has. But I think in the long term, that provides a better police force
for our country.
And
I'm proud of the fact that we made that decision because
integrity in policing,
and the service that we provide to communities across the country, has to be its
best, and there's no room for anything less than that.
Good. Okay. Right, next questions.
Supplementary.
Okay, cool.
Minister, what does recruitment look like once the 500
new police,
if that's reached in October, do we carry on and keep recruiting?
Yeah, absolutely. The nature of attrition means that when
you have a police force of nearly 11,000 people, which will be, or
10,700 when we finish, even at a 5% attrition
rate, that still means we need to have 500 going through college all the time.
But what's been really encouraging is the way recruitment is being managed, the
shifts, and
Deputy Commissioner Jill Rogers has done a fantastic job in terms of
that recruitment program, the way we're marketing, the messaging we're giving, and
the attraction that we're giving.
And those public facing events are not only good opportunities to
recruit, but they're also fantastic opportunities to promote policing
and community engagement. So, I think we've done a stellar job,
and that what we've learnt in that process, the 20 week training
program ongoing will continue to ensure that we have outstanding
police officers graduating from police college.
Cool. Now, hopefully to a new topic.
Back to Honorable Ginny Andersen.
Yeah, I'm interested in the organized crime work.
So we've seen, over the past couple of years, record levels of
profits being made by organized crime in the space of the distribution of
methamphetamine and other illicit drugs.
Have you taken a look at Te Ara Oranga?
Is there any additional funding for a program that has been in
place for using health and law enforcement
intervention simultaneously? Is there any more money for that or any view to
continue that forward?
Yeah, I have had a look at it. It's a fantastic program.
I think Te Ara Oranga, there is one other,
I think I'm looking around for somebody.
I think there's one other
facility or system that's been set up using that program.
But there are other also really good intervention programs that are being run, and
that's where the ROC program, I think is, as you'll know, that's the
opportunity to actually drive that reduced harm,
strengthening communities, those interventions.
The addiction services, which sits under Minister Ducey's
portfolio, has also had massive investment in that space.
But yeah, that is part of the program, and this is why I believe that the ROC
program and having an ongoing, consistent funding moving forward is
going to be important.
Given that police themselves have said that gangs are making record levels of
profit from manufacturing and distributing illicit
drugs, is there any view to further expand the resilience to
organized crime program in other parts of New Zealand?
Absolutely, and I believe that we should be having a similar
function in all towns. But at the moment, we've got 11 communities that
it's operating in. That is where that long-term
ongoing funding. So we did have the announcement of additional funding through the
Proceeds of Crime Unit. That's giving some boost and sustainability
to the future. But further funding is required.
No. Go ahead, Richard.
Commissioner, you've got your hand up.
Yes. Look, we want to continue to expand ROC because it does
offer tremendous support to communities that are very vulnerable.
Two communities to add to the 11 that the minister's just
referred to is Kaitaia and the Hutt Valley.
So in the next few months, two more, making it 13 communities
across New Zealand that will benefit from the ROC programs.
All right. Mm.
Was there any additional funding in this budget for
Resilient ROC?
Just the allocation of funding through the
Proceeds of Crime bid, which was... I'm going to reach for the number.
11.9 million.
11.9 million. Yeah.
11.9, yeah.
And,
just out of interest, how do you kind of evaluate whether it's
working? I'm not being critical.
No.
I think it's a good program.
Yeah.
But it's an area where you're driving long term change, right?
You're trying to stop intergenerational gang membership occurring.
How do you quantify that or measure whether it's working?
Yeah.
I think it's a great question.
Because it's, as you know, it's a slow burn, so measuring the impact is
difficult. But I will ask Corey Parnell to talk about
what we're putting around measuring and reporting.
Yeah, so we're just working at present moment with KPMG around an evaluation
model, and a benefits realization.
So I met with them again this week, so that program of work has been
commissioned, and fundamentally it is--
You'll bear in mind, with resilience to organized crime, that's not an overnight
results thing. It's longitudinal.
But we're putting those measures in place now and actually right down to
overarching the systems-level approach of where we're impacting,
seeing the decreases, say, into the health system or calls for service
in terms of the providers that we've established.
What I can say,
if I may-
Yeah
... certainly the last 10 days, for example, nationally,
the parallel work between our enforcement arm and the resilience to
organized crime, Northland would be the most recent last week.
It really is, you've got to go from both ends, and we really are seeing
empowered communities now with the investment we've made in ROCK actually
standing up and the need is there, and really making benefit gains.
So I think, the evaluation program that we're kind of-
And can it be made public?
No. I've got one from Raymond Nakay. No. Supplementary.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome, Minister. Thank you, everybody.
Minister, supplementary to this subject matter because in
your introductory remarks, you spoke about there's
an absolute focus on organized crime, and we're hearing about
how gang members, there's a lot of vulnerable
communities like high up north.
I'm glad that there's continued funding for combating gangs and
organized crime and the misery they peddle.
How is it that gangs manage to
infiltrate and to successfully target vulnerable
communities, whether it's our commissioner or minister that you want to
answer? And of course, that's the reason why it's so important that we combat
them.
I think I'll just start with the process that we are talking
about,
a layered approach. They operate like a business almost.
So there is layered approaches of the organizing bodies, which
some of those are overseas, and we've seen recent operations in that
space. And then, it is a supply driven issue,
so we're literally creating addicts or dependencies
on illicit products, and creating vulnerabilities.
So I think it is that tiered approach, and this is why the ROCK program
becomes so important in that space.
We're not going to arrest our way out of it.
We have to build resilience in those communities, and this is, as
has been mentioned, going in as we do enforcement projects and
bringing the ROCK team in at the same time, so that we are supporting the
families that are impacted by those search warrants, that we are
immediately in that space. And I've seen the evidence of how successful that
work is. So it is about strengthening the families who
are all impacted by the harm of this drug.
And this is how the layered approach of the gang network works in this
space, and the organized crime.
They are supplying
enormous amounts of harm into these communities
on every scale. So this is why
we have to be, to some extent,
agnostic as to commodity. So whether it's methamphetamine or
cocaine or
illicit tobacco or money laundering, all of those things will impact
these communities, and this is how we strengthen them.
Just a supplementary, please. Thank you, Minister.
What is it about these communities that are making them vulnerable?
How does that vulnerable category come about when
it comes to them being targeted by gangs and their
drugs?
I think there's socioeconomic issues.
There is mental health issues. There is family vulnerability
issues. There's housing issues. There's a range of things.
This is why the ROCK response is about all of those components.
But it is not just a problem of poorer
communities. It's impacting everywhere, and that's what we see from the
wastewater results.
And so the government's holistic focus on social
investment
falls into this.
Absolutely. And the more that we can strengthen these communities,
build economies, create jobs, create industry in
our regions, will be important to this response.
Minister-
Supplementary?
... yes.
All right. I'll take yours.
Just interested in terms of organized crime.
I'd just be interested in any comments you may have on
the corruption within corrections
that's been exposed recently, and what steps
police are taking to address that aspect of organized
crime. That is to say, the corruption of aspects of the public
service.
Yeah. And I think that's probably the best one for the commissioner to answer in
that space. But
that was one of the first comments the commissioner made when he came into his
role, was about the integrity of the police force.
And so I'm sure the commissioner would want to make some comment around that.
My question was about Corrections, though. Just to clarify.
Yeah. Right. Let's get the commissioner. Commissioner, did you hear the question?
Yes, I did. Look,
yes, I did. Thank you. Corruption is one of the enablers of organized
crime and these criminal networks that exist within our
country and offshore will exploit anybody who gets in the way or has
the potential to get in the way of furthering their business model.
That could include police officers. It could include corrections officers.
It could include customs agents. So we, as an organization, as
you've referred in that recent operation, it doesn't matter who you are, if you're
involved in a criminal network and you're participating in
helping to further a criminal business model, then we'll come after you.
And I think we do a pretty good job, but we do it with Corrections.
We do it with other agencies. We can't do that on our own.
But corruption is one of the biggest threats globally
To organise criminal activity. And that is why we have to prioritize the work
when officials are seen to be
engaging with those networks.
Well done on
detecting and prosecuting that. I guess my question is about how
we avoid that kind of corruption in the future, and what kind of
proactive steps you're taking across justice
agency
to stamp out the opportunity kind of exploitation.
Yes. Well, as you've heard ... Oh, sorry.
I just think that this is the broader picture
around, there's a whole range of things we can do, which is from
vetting to visibility, to ensure there's reporting mechanisms,
protection for those that are reporting issues, all of those things across
agency about consistency. But visibility of workforce.
But the challenge is that you have different drivers that will corrupt
people. So people that have family members under threat, they may be
with high integrity themselves, but when you're being targeted
because you have the ability to look the other way
because of vulnerability. So I think it's about the engagement you have with your
workforce, and I think that's part of the entire picture.
We've had big operations at Auckland Airport involving baggage handlers,
so roles that
can be corrupted easily through financial drivers.
But I think as a country, we have a strong mechanism to
weeding out harm. We've just got to stay vigilant on that space, and I think
there's a lot of work cross-agency to achieve that.
All right.
Yeah, if I can just add as well. I mentioned earlier today that
I've increased the resourcing for our integrity and conduct
unit. Part of that increase in resourcing is designed to
target insider threats.
And globally, insider threats in many agencies is a
growing problem. So we're trying to get ahead of that in New Zealand Police.
All right. We've got five, seven minutes left.
We've got Honorable
Ginny Anderson again. Hopefully something different.
Thank you very much.
The budget includes $50 million for frontline
policing.
Can you explain why that's time limited for funding?
So,
specific budget items, because I have limited visibility, I think you can
answer that.
Sure. So the
response previously, that is the two-year time limited cost pressure funding into
our baseline to enable us to develop the capability plan to
inform the future investment choices from there.
Yeah. So that's for wages, I understand, that
50 million.
If you're having trouble recruiting or we're trying to get more police to come,
do you think it's a problem for police that wages are being continually paid
for out of funding that's not baselined?
I think the comment about our
difficulty recruiting, our pipeline would suggest we don't have difficulty
recruiting. We have challenges getting them through the pipeline and
through college and trained and out.
And the attrition rate, I think being as low as it is, would suggest that that
is resolved. But I think that the
policing manage the payroll process.
Every government agency would want to pay their staff more.
I think that's not unique.
Yeah.
But I think the policing's attrition rate would suggest that we are in a good
place, and funding will continue to be managed.
So why isn't police wages coming out of
the main budget? Why is it time limited funding?
Because that was cost pressure limits.
I think that's what has been defined as cost pressure.
Correct. Yeah. But that's an ongoing cost.
You know the bulk of the police budget is wages. That's what it consists of.
Why are wages a time limited amount in the budget?
I don't think that 50 million's purely wages.
It is. 30 million.
It's not purely wages.
Partially.
There is an element of it that is wages, that is based on existing cost
pressures. It is not the
cost for the current negotiation.
And the reason for that, I guess it's included in that cost pressure funding, so we
can have the discussion around the baseline funding going forward at that point.
Okay. Now I've got a supplementary from Mr. Halbait.
Thanks, Chair. And thanks, Minister, for your work particularly around recruitment.
It was great to be with you at the graduation of Wing
393, the Kevin Mealamu wing, in March.
And the graduates there seemed pretty happy with the process they had gone through.
Is the funding in the current budget, in your view, going to ensure that we've
got that continued success
through graduating wings through this year to ensure we've got that recruitment
pipeline continue, as you've alluded to?
Yeah, absolutely. And the 191 million
was that uplift and also funding for the resources needed
for that additional 500. But ongoing, that program of work is in
place, and I think it's
funded from within the baselines, I think.
Yeah.
The previous funding for the 500 was in Budget '24.
And given the engagement of those graduates in wanting
to become police officers, and clearly
them and their families happy on days and occasions like we were at,
are you confident that there's enough funding in the budget to
entice people to apply to become part of the New Zealand Police force
in the year ahead?
Absolutely. And the way the police have been marketing
is really innovative. I think we've got the
almost record levels of YouTube engagement through the
ride along videos, which have been highly successful.
The way we're messaging things like, even the commissioner shows up at all the
Around the Bays events. We have
police officers standing at the 2.4K saying, "You've made it.
You could be a police officer."
So all of those things are actually low cost, but really highly effective
engagement. The other thing that the policing have done is ensure that
those that are applying to join are speaking to a uniformed officer very
early in the process to be talked through.
And a lot of those, that is within baseline, that is
ongoing, but it has been highly effective.
And lastly, are you comfortable that the recruits are spread
across the country? I know out of that wing specifically, there are a number that
came to both Whanganui and Hawera.
Are you comfortable that the recruits are going back to
communities around the country?
So basically part of the recruitment process is you
are pretty much advised where you're going back to.
So the police are doing a great job at recruiting from the areas that need police
officers.
Right.
So there's some areas where we don't need police officers.
So if you're prepared to leave where you're from to go to another area, you'll get
into police college quicker, if you want to go back to a specific area.
So part of the decision making in that recruitment process is to
ensure that we're recruiting from the areas that most need staff
or that those staff are prepared to go to those areas.
So there's been really good proactive initiatives in those areas like Northland
and the East Coast around getting people to where we need them.
Fantastic.
All right. I think that draws us nicely to a close.
I want to thank you, Minister, for attending.
Deputy Commissioner and the Commissioner in London and the
rest of the team, thank you very much.
Thank you.
Now I'm going to ask all of you to move
out of the room because we've got some private business we have to conduct.
But thank you very much.
Thank you.
Bye.
Coffee eventually turn up.
Yeah, cool.
Poppers was packed.
Heaving.
And you guys got there just after.
Who's le-- You're leaving the same?
I don't come up.
Okay, I'll just ask a line, and then I'll go in with Lawrence-
I'm going to-
If that's all right.
When you do yours-
Okay
... they are-
This will be the 27th
... then she's going to swap with Lawrence.
Okay. Well, do you want to go first?
No, I'll let you lead off, and then I'll go straight in replacements with the-
That's what we know we'd get.
Mm-hmm.
There he is.
Good morning.
Now, you've got a small team with you, I presume?
Yes.
And the secretary, he loves it here.
Hello, Minister. How was the opera?
There is-
You can raise it up. We-
Okay. First of all, I'd just like to thank you, Minister, for turning
up. Also, the Secretary of Justice, Andrew Keb
White, back with us again.
We've got an hour and a half with you, so we'll finish at 12:45.
So obviously, you've done this before.
We'll have a few quick introduction, then we'll get straight into the
questions.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and I want to start
by acknowledging the hard work of
the committee. It has been a-
A very active government, of course, in terms of legislation in the justice space,
and this committee has carried the burden of that.
And so I just want to thank you all for your work.
I want to acknowledge the efforts of the Ministry of Justice team
who I have with me here, led by Andrew Kibblewhite, who also
have been
operating at a frenetic pace over the last two and a half years
delivering the policy work and the legislation. So I want to acknowledge them.
Mr. Chairman,
government's very much focused on
fixing the basics in law and order
so that we can build a future where New Zealanders feel safe in their communities.
And that's their expectation. So we've had a very busy time of it.
I'd just like to note, for example, a recent milestone with the new offense
for stalking and harassment, which took effect on the 26th
of May.
And we send a clear message from this parliament and this government
that there will be real consequences for that
behavior. It's now a criminal offense, and
police have extra powers to deal with that.
That follows efforts that we've also made
in the sexual violence space, which is removing the ability for permanent name
suppression for
convicted sex offenders, and also very much part
and parcel of the sentencing reforms, which has limited
the amount of discounts that judges can
apply in sentences so as to send a clearer message
from the elected parliament of New Zealand and
people of New Zealand that we want to have real consequences for crime.
Equally, we've been working away in
dealing with if you want to reduce the number of victims
of crime, which has been our focus,
then an obvious place to start is with that very small group of New Zealanders who
create multiple victims over and over again.
A very good place to start is with members of gangs.
Gangs are a very small portion of the adult population, far less than
1%, but they're associated with 20% to 25% of violent crime.
That's why the government's focused on making life much more difficult for the
gangs to operate. And banning gang patches has made a
big impact in public perception. But also, there are many
tools that police now have to push back against violent crime.
In terms of measuring progress,
when we came in in 2023, according to the Crime and Victims Survey, there
were 185,000 New Zealanders who had been a
victim of serious sexual or violent
crime in the 12 months beforehand, 185,000 New Zealanders.
And we set a goal to reduce that by 20,000 by 2029.
I can give you the latest figures that we've continued to make excellent
progress on that. There are now 46,000 fewer
victims of crime than there were in October
2023. So that is holding
on to the incredible progress that we made.
The last three months, it was 49,000, so there's been a slight uptick, but
essentially holding steady at that massive reduction in the
number of victims of crime, and that's 46,000 households that haven't had to go
through the trauma of being victims of violent crime.
Now, there's many other things that I could
refer to, but I'm very happy to answer any questions on any topics.
Good. I'm going to start with Camilla Belich.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister. Nice to see you again.
I echo your thoughts around the amount of work that the Ministry of Justice
has done
recently with the huge number of bills that have come through
this committee. However, in this budget,
the Ministry of Justice is not excluded from the
reduction in full-time equivalent.
So I want to know, due to the reductions in spending in this budget, what
business units, programs, and services will be impacted?
Well, of course, those are the decisions that'll be worked through in the next few
months. And the
secretary is responsible for that.
What we saw, of course,
across government over the six years of the previous administration
was a hiring spree across the public sector, and we went from
47,000 in total to 63,000.
And that is one of the reasons, just one of the many reasons
why, as a country, in relation to this budget,
we are still, notwithstanding all the efforts of this government, borrowing
$11.4 billion in the next year. And New Zealanders are sending
that bill to the next generation. And so we're determined to
change that and set a path back to surplus,
which is what we left the previous Labor administration in
2017, and we'll do it again because we think it's important for a
government to live within its means.
And one of the ways that we're doing that is right-sizing the public service.
And so every area of the public service has to contribute to
that. In terms of who goes where and what happens in every
particular little group, we haven't made those final decisions
yet, but it'll be a big effort across the team.
But we're very confident that the overall numbers will still
enable us to deliver good quality public services.
Supplementary. So I suppose, Minister, it's a little bit frustrating to
hear, and I've spoke to you as part of the Public Service Commission
hearing, and you said that the responsibilities for how reductions will
be made will be up to individual departments.
Now, we have a department that you are responsible for.
We have the chief executive here as well, and you've
said that you are going to be right-sizing the public service.
But we don't know what the impact of those spending cuts
decisions will be, and it appears to me that is
because you don't know.
Well, no, that is quite incorrect.
So what are the cuts going to be?
The announcements were made on this a month ago
in relation to the budget.
And it would be a bit odd to turn around and expect that
five days later or three weeks later,
the exact path to achieve that would be laid out and made
public. Obviously, there's work to be done to figure out how best to
do that while preserving the best outcomes in terms of
what we're trying to achieve, such as reducing the number of victims of crime.
We were making great progress. But the secretary might like to just comment on the
process from here.
I can. So in the Ministry of Justice, and we've been having a conversation,
including with staff, over the last 18 months, that our expectation would
be that we would have fewer people in the future.
And that is because we are actually one of the agencies that is investing in
technology, and that technology will enable us to rethink how
the system works and how we function.
So, the digital case management in the courts, a
project known as Te Oreka, will enable us to, I think, find
both productivity gains, as well as generate better outcomes for people as
they come through the court system.
So we've been having that conversation before the government announced these
specific reductions, and it will actually play into the themes of using
technology, maintaining service quality,
and at the same time, through, I think, quite a
careful process, reducing our overall headcount.
If you think of a simple example, there are currently people who
are very busy photocopying and printing very
large physical files and then putting them on a little trolley and
pushing them around from place to place for court hearings.
And
in a very short time, we'll be joining the modern era,
and these things will be available on the screen.
But there is an incredible amount of physical
activity involved in the actual sort of delivery of
paper in our system right now that we're needing to deal with.
Supplementary?
No. Let Camilla finish.
And I'm next.
Oh, you may-
Oh, I'm sorry. I was next.
No. Do you want me to?
No, I just...
Okay, I'm going supplementary here.
Thank you, Chair. So just to be clear, it is possible to
achieve better outcomes, more productivity on
a lower headcount in circumstances like you've just described.
In the Ministry of Justice, that would be our intent.
That will require investment, which we're putting in place.
It will require training, it will require us to work very closely with staff and
with stakeholders, and in our case, obviously, with the judiciary.
Yeah.
But in our case, that's absolutely what I'm expecting.
And you've already done some of those things and invested in some of those things,
as the minister just described, to enable that outcome to be achieved.
The investment is underway. Our headcount, like other agencies, has been
increasing. And the reality is, as you run a dual
system for a period of time,
we will have to be conscious of that.
But our trajectory over the
next two or three years is very clear that we'll be able to
reduce our headcount, and I think do it in a very measured and careful
way. And we have been talking to staff about this.
I think the ministry staff are not under any illusion that their
work worlds are going to change. So we will be working with them so that we can
basically bring the staff on that journey.
But the ministry will be smaller in the future, I'm sure of
that.
Right. I'm going to Honorable Dr. Duncan Webb.
This is same thing.
If Oreka is the answer, is it
on time, on budget?
Broadly speaking, there have been some delays.
But in terms of the go-to date,
I think we have that established in November this year for the family court,
and that's very exciting.
I remember a couple of decision points for myself, whether we really sort
of insist upon
the original date and increase the risk of things not being
effectively laid out, and so we were prepared to take a little bit longer to make
sure that
everything is done to ensure that it is successful.
Bearing in mind that there have been failures in the past, and we don't want to
repeat those. But you might like to add.
Yeah. Initially, we were targeting
middle of this year, beginning of our rollout,
leading through until the end of the year.
Now we're beginning the rollout in November.
And we conclude for the family court, which is phase one, and we will conclude
that, I think, in May next year.
And how about the other part of that question?
What's the budget on it looking like?
Because you've been up front with this committee about running into some
speed bumps.
Have they increased cost?
No, the overall, we're still in good shape with
the project. There are always
ebbs and flows in a project like this, and we've had lots of external
assurance, and the minister's engaged with our external assurers, and
we're continuing to follow that through.
We've been running,
just in the last few weeks, a lot of workshops where the judiciary have actually
been coming and then using the technology as part of the testing
process, and
that has been-- It's actually very reassuring and
very positive because I think we're going to have a
system here that will work very well, and it will be within the
overarching budget parameters that we've got set for it.
Okay, I've got a couple more steps on this topic. Another one from Camilla Bird.
Thank you for your answers, and I take your answer essentially to be that you
don't know what the costs are, but it might be that you'll have savings due to
technological advances that you may be able to implement.
And I just wanted to-
Sorry, that's-
That's me paraphrasing. Not direct quote, obviously.
But- The question that I have is how realistic is that when we
look at a previous initiative, Project
Whētu, which has been removed from
funding in this budget, essentially because it wasn't ready, and that
was to have an
all-together process for the management of family violence.
Do you have any evidence to suggest that there won't be
impacts on the services that the Ministry of Justice can provide
due to the implementation of these new technologies, or is it a
very conceptual program at this stage?
It's far from conceptual. I'm absolutely confident that
the process we're putting in place
will transform the way the courts work, and it will be better for all
participants of the courts.
When I first arrived as Secretary for Justice, one
of my early impressions is that the most significant
technological advancement in the courts in the last 40 years was probably
the Post-it Note, because the Post-it Note is actually how we keep track of
information for the most part at the moment.
That's all going to change. We're going to have a digitally based case
management system
that we'll be able to be engaged with by the lawyers, and over
time will absolutely transform the way the court functions, will open
up a whole lot of new opportunities.
It's very complex, and we've seen other countries go down this path
and really strike quite serious headwinds, but
I'm really confident with how this project is tracking at the moment.
I suppose just a final question on why will this project succeed when we've
got an example here of a project that's looking to a very similar thing within-
Well, Whētu is-- I think the committee will have opportunity to talk about
that this afternoon in the family violence and sexual violence space because it's
in that space. But that project, and I don't want to take up the
minister's time here, but that project generated a lot of
good value in terms of a revised operating model.
But we have
pushed pause at the moment on the technology element of that
because
essentially we weren't confident we had the line up across all of the various
agencies that needed to contribute-
Let's leave this up for this afternoon.
Right, Todd, you said a-
Yes. My follow-up is actually around Te Aureka, and obviously this week we've seen
quite a serious
public,
well, basically serious allegations around another department
not properly informing their ministers actually over a long period.
You've already touched on the fact that actually Minister Goldsmith's met with the
external assurance people, but I just want to give both of
you some time to explain why you can be so confident this
project is on track and will be delivered.
And Minister, I think it's actually important that you could articulate how you've
been kept up to date and that you feel you are fully informed.
Yes, well,
if you step back a couple of notches,
what are our priorities in the justice sector?
Fewer victims of crime, number one.
Reducing a small group of
repeat serious youth offenders. My third area of focus has been to
speed up the processes of the courts, because
people are waiting years to get a resolution to
criminal cases.
And that traumatizes the victims, and it adds colossal cost to
the whole process. And when it comes to fixing up civil disputes,
and if you can't do that in a timely and affordable way, then that has massive
consequences for the economy. And likewise for family
court. So it's a massive challenge, that it's a longstanding challenge and an
international one that continued to get worse and worse over the last six years.
And so it's been a real focus of this government to try and turn that around.
The good news is we're making progress.
One core element of that
has been Te Aureka, which is this digitizing program
that we've got for the courts, which is fundamental to fixing the basics.
And I would make the point,
I don't think people who are tuning into this,
the global audience and no doubt that we'll have,
would be amazed to learn just how rudimentary
the current system is.
And so
because we've got these great physical folders, and
I've been to the back rooms of these courts and it literally is
people
with these great folders. Now, of course-
I've pushed the trolleys.
Now, yes. And of course, if you've got an event
in the court process that needs to be done,
and you've got a very busy courts in Waitākere, but you've got somebody
who's a judge who's got nothing to do, particularly in Tauranga, for
example. They can't do it because you'd physically have to drive everything down to
Tauranga. And so, it's very archaic, and that is
the huge potential for improvement that we've got with Te Aureka.
Now, of course, yes, the question that you ask around how can you be
assured about it. And so we have a regular
process where I'm updated on how it's going and
you've got the simple situation in place
doing that. But then, of course, the Ministry of Justice have brought
in an IQA
group of experts, Australians I think they are, and
local reviewers. And I get told everything's fine, and then I say,
"Well, okay. Well, I want to be sure about that." And so I've met physically with
them at a number of stages, and looked them
in the eye and they've taken me through how they are confident that progress is
being made. And these are the areas of concern, and these are the things
that the project is working on to rectify those issues.
And I've met with them on a couple of occasions, and I'll no doubt be meeting them
again soon. So that's how I've approached it.
And that gives me a reasonable level of confidence.
There is always, of course, risk in any large project, and so
that has to be acknowledged. But we do what we
can through those provisions to have a high level of confidence
that we're on track.
If I could add to that, I think the committee's right to be asking lots of
questions. This would be one of the most complex
IT
underpinned change processes in the country.
And when other countries have tried to do similar things, they have
not succeeded as effectively as they would've hoped.
So this is big and it's hard. We have a steering
committee set up that I brought in the ex-government chief digital officer, Colin
MacDonald, to chair. So I have an independent chair over a steering committee for
this project. The Australian
input that the minister refers to is a
individual on that steering committee who has been involved in similar processes in
Australia, and so they join our steering committees remotely to be
part of those conversations. The IQAs, is a New Zealand
firm, in fact, Minister, that we have used there, but we have had
successive ones of those. We've had the gateway review process, our
risk and assurance committee, which is a really solid, strong
group as well. They have regular sessions talking about Te
Ariki, recognizing that this has got such a high level of risk associated
with it. And we've got a good team that's working hard, and we've got a ministry
that's ready for it-
Yeah
... and that's ready for the training that's coming along.
And I'll just add one other thing. One of the lessons learned from
previous failures was,
if it is not done without the thorough engagement of the
judiciary and the users of the system, that is a
high
risk approach. And so, the core users of the system,
including the judiciary, have been integral to the whole development of the
program.
Yeah.
Thank you. I think it's just important because we want this project to succeed.
Yes.
And it sounds to me like,
as a justice, as an agency has done this all in the right way.
So I just thought it's important-
And we have-
... covering that
... recognizing this committee's previous interest in it and how important it is.
I think we have organized for a demonstration
session-
Yes. Yeah
... with you, I think at the end of July, when we'll come and the committee will be
able to ask-
We're looking forward
... questions on that as well.
Right. Now we're going to move to a different topic from Timothy Paul.
Thanks. Morning.
So I'm really interested in some of the real costs in the
budget and over the next year as a consequence of political decision
making. And I'm going to start with the Treaty Clauses Review, but I am
also interested in the costs behind the move on orders.
But we'll start with the Treaty Clause Review.
So
I guess basic question, do you hope to pass the legislation in full
in this term? And if so,
what money is set aside in the budget for
that bill or that law when it comes into power?
Well, in terms of the first question, no, I don't expect
we'll pass it before the election.
I expect we'll have the legislation introduced, and we'll have our first reading,
and it'll be sent off to a select committee to consider that.
In terms of the second, in terms of money set aside,
I don't think it necessarily has budget implications.
What we're trying to achieve with the Treaty References Review is that
over the last 30 years, successive governments have
put forth a potpourri of references to the
Treaty, and its principles sometimes give effect to, sometimes take
account of, sometimes honor, sometimes have regard to,
and they've used different names in terms of the Treaty, Te Tiriti, and a whole
bunch of things. And so, the primary exercise is to
get some consistency around that.
And then ask the question as part of the coalition agreement with New
Zealand First, looking at 19 or so
of those acts,
does it make sense having a Treaty reference at
all? And if it does, how can we be clear about what we mean?
And so we've gone through that, set a few aside, because the RMA
and the Conservation Act and a number of others have got their own
processes, and they've been carried out separately.
And we've come to some draft conclusions.
We've done some consultation with
some iwi groups, and particularly the Iwi Leaders Forum.
And then we'll be introducing the legislation, and then it'll go off to select
committee, and then everybody will have the opportunity to have a say as well on
that.
What have those iwi leaders said to you about it?
Well,
been a variety of
feedback. I think probably I could generalize and say that
the feedback from that quarter has been, "Don't
do it, and leave things as they are." But
the feedback that we've had from the broader public is that we want to have some
clarity about that, and this is a coalition commitment that we're determined to
carry out.
Some of those costs that I was quite keen to get
information on are from your official's advice
around from the Cabinet paper that says that the costs
to the Crown for the Treaty Clause Review would be
or could be damage to the Maori-Crown relationship, increased
litigation risk to the Crown,
wide-ranging impacts on Maori social, cultural, economic, and environmental
interests.
And the list goes on. There's about seven different things listed in your
official's advice. You're telling me you've budgeted for none of that?
Well,
all these things can be debated. In terms of legal risk,
there's an ongoing legal risk if you have vagueness in legislation,
and we deal with that every day. And so we're hoping to improve that.
In terms of the impact on Crown Maori relations,
included is
dealing with the Crown Pastoral Land Act, and
all sorts of legislation, which I don't think necessarily is something that
is central to everybody's thinking.
A big part of this is around tidying up the legislation book
and being clear about what we-
Secretary
... what we want to achieve, and we think it's a reasonable thing to do.
Can I just ask one last-
Keep going
... supplementary on that. The policy rationale that you
continue to give in your answers is that there is uncertainty because of all the
different ways that the Treaty is referenced throughout legislation.
But your officials say that this, similar to the Treaty
Principles Bill
Actually creates uncertainty and that the policy rationale doesn't
actually exist in the way that you're characterizing it.
And we welcome their feedback,
but we also are aware of the fact that there was an
election three years ago. Three parties were elected,
and part of the coalition agreement that we put together was that we
would do certain things. And one of the things that we were going to do is a
review of the treaty references, and that's what we've done.
And
we believe that it'll be a useful exercise, but we're going through
it in a careful and considered manner, and everybody will have their chance to have
their say.
Okay, I've got a supplementary from Mr. Carl Bates.
Thanks very much, Chair. So, Minister, do you think this will support the Crown
to actually meet its obligations by being clear on what
these obligations are in each of the acts in a more streamlined
manner?
Yes, I will. Yes, I do. And there are
a wide variety of
examples and instances that we're trying to be
clearer about.
And I recognize that there are deep
discussions to be had about this. And so what we're trying to do, essentially, as a
government is
figure out
what's an appropriate place for references to the Treaty of
Waitangi within our legislation,
in the context of
recognizing our treaty responsibilities
and our history and our treaty settlements,
and
recognizing those
responsibilities while also figuring out how to operate in a
modern liberal democracy where everybody has an expectation of equal
rights and an equal say in what goes on in their community.
And so those are the
discussions that we continue to have as a country, and there's a lively debate
on where those lines should be drawn, and that's appropriate.
And we'll continue to have that debate.
The Māori Party are at one end of the spectrum.
They have very strong views and good luck to them.
And there are other views across. One thing that
I object to, though, is there's often an
implication put out there that Māori have a single view on
these matters. And I'd just like to remind the select committee and those tuning in
that there are nearly a million Māori New Zealanders, and they
don't all think the same. And there's a wide variety of views out
there about what we should be focusing on and
all these matters. And those wide variety of views are reflected within this
Parliament amongst Māori members of Parliament.
So it shouldn't come as a surprise that there's a debate about these matters.
Okay, I've got one last supplementary on this, and then I'm going to come back to
you, Tamatha.
Minister, the Ministry of Education's view on this was that there were no apparent
benefits to it. Were they wrong?
Well, I
respectfully disagreed with that assessment.
But there's ongoing discussions to be had.
And
what we set out to achieve is we came up with a proposal of various
pieces of legislation that could be changed.
All the different government departments and ministers have given their feedback on
that and will be making some amendments through that
process.
Okay. Sorry, I'm going to change because Mr. Bates got to leave.
I'm going to give you a new primary.
Thanks very much, Chair. Minister, in relation to the
introduction of the stalking and harassment legislation,
is there any budget allocation within the
justice component to ensure the effective implementation of that in the
coming year, or is that now a matter for police and
you're comfortable with where we've got that to in the last
parliamentary year?
Well, look, the
primary budget implications for
the stalking legislation, which brings in a new criminal offense
for stalking above a particular threshold,
is that there will
potentially be a few more people imprisoned as a result of that.
And so that will lead to
some extra costs for corrections, and there will be some
costs through the
courts system. Not, I wouldn't have thought, colossal
figures, but
that has to be recognized. I do find it
interesting, and I very much value
the
universal support that legislation has had across the
parliament,
and recognizing that it is
bringing in tougher sentences for particular
activities, and that is stalking, and we want to have real consequences
for crime in that area. Something that
some members don't agree with on just about every other topic.
But on this topic, at least we do agree on that, and so I'm pleased about that, and
we're sending a very strong and clear signal.
And if it means that a few people have to be locked up, well then so be it, because
we want to send a strong message.
I've got a couple of supplements.
Thank you.
You had another one? Right. Ramon Nagve, and then I'll come to you, Dan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon, Minister, and thank you everyone for being here.
Supplementary to those answers, Minister, with
respect to the overall spending under justice
for incorrections and making sure that there's room there for
more people that need to be in prison, linking that up with
laws like making stalking illegal.
Some have the view
that there's too much being spent on corrections, on
making more prison cells. But Minister, how does this
spending align with the government's focus
on putting victims first and making sure that New Zealand
is safe?
Well, it aligns very well with that.
And like I say, you know, I-
Hopefully we can bring it into the budget.
Yes, because the budget- Well, it's Justice being-
I mean, if you're to sum up our response in Justice, it's about restoring the
basics in law and order
so that we can build a future where people feel safe in their communities.
And our core
focus in that area has been to reduce the number of
victims of serious violent and sexual offending.
Okay. Yes.
I do need to make the contrast. Previous administration did have a
focus on reducing the prison population by 30%,
and we all want to see fewer people in prison.
But it needs to follow a reduction in crime, not the other way
around. And to have a big reduction in the prison population
at the same time as a big increase in violent crime is not acceptable to us.
And so,
that is why we've been prepared to make the investment that we have in the
corrections system, to ensure that that is dealt with
appropriately.
And so stalking is one element of that.
Another element, of course, is
the
restriction on the discounts available to
sentencing because, if
you think in the sexual violence space,
it is quite difficult to achieve a conviction in sexual
violence cases, and that is a longstanding
issue. But if you go through the whole process and at the end of it,
one is convicted of serious sexual offending, like rape, and then the
consequence is
a bit of time in home detention playing
PlayStation, that is not acceptable to
the broader community. And that's why Parliament has sent a clear message
through the changes to the Sentencing Act, and also the return of three strikes,
that we want to have fairer consequences for this kind of offending.
Okay. I've got a supplementary from Duncan.
Yeah.
And then we're going to start a new topic.
In terms of the
justice pipeline
and the cost pressures that's causing,
we've got projections that see the prison
population exceeding 14,000 in the
foreseeable future.
Accepting that, and I don't think it's accurate to say that any government
aims for a particular number in prison, but do
you have a sense of where that number will
settle down to? What the steady state, if you like, is
expected to be in terms of prison population, and how that's
managed within the justice sector budgets?
No, I don't have a clear
long-term target in mind.
I would like to see it reduced. I mean, our primary focus is to
reduce the number of victims of crime. That's the measure.
And if that requires more people in prison,
or
if over time, the message gets through and there are fewer victims
of crime and less offending leading to fewer people being in
prison, that's the outcome that we're after.
And so, our expectation is that there will be an increase in the short
term,
but over time, we hope to reduce that because there is less crime in our
community and less offending.
So are you expecting that 14,000 number to
be
a peak, or are you expecting it to exceed that?
Well, I think our long-term goal in Justice is to have,
like I say, fewer victims of crime, therefore less offending, therefore
ultimately, less people in the criminal justice system and less people
in jail.
But if in the short term, it requires more people to be locked up, then that's
something that we're
comfortable with because that's sending a clear message.
And
like I say, there is a small group of New Zealanders who
create fresh victims time and time and time again as
they revolve through the cycling door of the justice system.
Right.
And we're not prepared to tolerate that.
Okay, and in terms of what happens in prison
and value for money,
does
increasing
prison population
increase or decrease reoffending?
Well,
that's a topic of great debate
around the place. And so in terms of
the effectiveness of rehabilitation in the prison system,
probably a matter best addressed to the
Minister of Corrections. But I think anybody looking
at it from the outside would say there is colossal room
for improvement in that because a lot of the
rehabilitation efforts have relatively low levels of success.
And so, there's a huge challenge still ahead of us
in that space, but we'd still continue to invest very, very significantly in that.
Okay.
But of course,
imprisoning people has multiple
reasons. One element, of course, in the Sentencing Act is around
denouncing the act
and the power of denunciation,
such as in the stalking context. We're putting people in
prison to punish them, but also to
denounce the act clearly
so that society understands that that is something that we're
not happy to tolerate.
And then finally, of course, there is an element of when
those offenders, particularly repeat recidivist offenders,
are taken out of circulation it's harder for them to
create fresh victims, and that's a very important part of it.
Right now we're going to Tamatha Paul for a new line of questioning, I hope.
Well, it is, but it sort of builds on this line-
Okay. Yeah, that's fine
... which everyone's interested in, which is really trying to compare the costs
that are allocated through justice or
the criminal justice system more broadly.
Might touch on corrections, might touch on-
Yes
... law justice,
relative to doing other things, right?
So imprisonment's not the only
solution,
and
I want to talk about that in the context of the move-on orders, because obviously
there's a cost to
a wide range of government departments in implementing that legislation.
So justice costs, courts costs, police costs, corrections costs.
Why did you opt for
choosing to criminalize homeless people
over housing them when housing people is
a far cheaper option for the government than locking them up?
Yeah. Okay. Well, just starting off,
the member is completely wrong. We are not criminalizing
homeless people. Never have, never will be, and just saying that
over and over again does not change the reality.
Now, the
Greens may have a policy of shutting down prisons. I think, is that the policy?
I-
That's party manifest though. The other-
Oh,
okay. So Greens want to defund the
police, don't they? Or is it closing-
That was your words that you put on the billboard.
Oh, okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
Words that didn't come out of my mouth, but you know how-
I think they did
... spin machines.
I think they did. But anyway, the point was-
When?
I-
Hopefully we'll get to the point.
I'd love a reference of when it came out of my mouth.
Right, let's just get-
It'll be all over TikTok.
Let's just answer the question
Criminal... Well-
No, it's disinformation.
Order!
Well, that's rich coming-
Right. Let's stay there
... from the member. The member started off with a piece of disinformation herself,
and now she's accusing me of disinformation.
Okay, let's rip into the question.
So that answer-
Disinformation is okay
... the point is that the move-on orders
do not criminalize homelessness.
What they do is they give the police
with the power to issue a move-on order,
and that's not a criminal conviction or anything like that.
It is an order to a person,
and telling them to move on. If they refuse to move on,
and if they say, "Stuff you, I'm staying where I am", well, then
they are subject to potential criminal prosecution, and that's
appropriate. And when the member talks about the costs,
the costs that I'm minding is the cost to
the many thousands of New Zealanders who put their life
savings into a small business,
such as a cafe or a retail outfit in our
town squares,
and who get up every morning at 6:30 or whatever it is and
get themselves along there, hire people, take all the risks,
and find that there are a number of people lined up on the
pavement outside the entrance to their door,
making it a very unappealing prospect for potential
customers to come in. And they're struggling at their wits end,
and wanting to be able to get on with their lives, and are being held back
by unacceptable antisocial behavior in our town squares.
Now, people, everybody can see this and are aware of it.
I think there was a survey done of the local businesses in Central
Auckland where 97% of the owners were
unhappy and felt unsafe in that environment, and so that's what we're trying to
deal with. And if it costs the
overall justice sector some
investment to deal with that, then that's an investment well made.
But I would put the context, of course.
If that was the only thing that we were doing to deal with the challenge of
people who are struggling in life and are
homeless or are in a state of being on the
footpaths of our town squares. If that was the only thing we were doing, I think
you'd have a fair criticism. But of course it is not.
There
are many, many ways in which we as a society seek to
help those who are in need,
and across, whether it's one of the more generous
welfare systems in the world, whether it's all the various housing
investments that we make, the extra 300 beds that we've made available in the last
little while, and all the mental health and addiction programs that we fund.
So there's enormous
amount of things that we do to help people, but we also need some tools to deal
with antisocial behavior.
Two questions based on that answer.
Where are they meant to move on to?
They are meant to move on further away, at a distance
specified by the police constable, and that may be
a few hundred meters up the road, or it might be over the horizon,
or it may be to a place where
there are support services available, such as
a city mission. That will be at the discretion of the police officer.
And in terms of the public disorder that you talk about, the policy
rationale underlying the bill,
why doesn't police data back up your claims that everything is disorderly when
public disorder is at a 10-year low?
Well, we have made some improvement
over the last two and a half years of the government where-
Order, Minister
... we've moved away from an approach which was
soft on crime under the Labor and Green
coalition in the previous year, where there was a culture
of excuses for crime. We've moved away from that, and so some
progress has been made. But I think if
the member was to get out and talk to people who live and work, and
visit our CBDs, in particular in our town squares,
including Lambton Quay in Wellington, and
places all around the city, they would get some pretty strong feedback that there
is a lot of room for improvement.
I don't know a lot about the units.
Okay. Right. I'm going to Joseph Looney.
I'm hoping that we're going to keep this within the context of the budget.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And just to give a brief context to my
question I worked for about a decade in courts across the country, from
Invercargill to Auckland, and I spent a couple of years working in the Auckland
District Court, including in the alcohol and other drug treatment court.
And I'm interested in any feedback you can give us about that in
terms of we constantly see homeless people in that court, and
constantly do.
There's always accommodation available for them.
They almost never stay in that accommodation because of complexities
that underlie it with mental health-
Yep
... alcohol, and drug addiction issues.
I was wondering if you can talk to us anything about the intersection with these
move on orders and any other work programs that are going on to address some of the
more complex issues that underpin this behavior.
Yeah. Well,
those matters that you raise are absolutely
fundamental issues, and it's a
very broad topic. But I think New Zealanders
are fair-minded people, and
our instinct is to help
those who are in need, and that continues to
be the case.
And so,
no country and no government that I'm aware of has perfected
the response to the challenges of people who struggle
to live in the modern society in which we operate, who struggle
with addictions
or mental health issues, and a whole host of
other problems in their lives. And so,
as a country
and a government, we continue to invest very, very significantly
in programs in all those areas. And
we make some progress, but we've nowhere near solved all those issues.
And so that continues to be a massive focus of my colleague, Matt
Doocey, in the mental health and addiction space,
Tama Potaka in the housing space,
and many other colleagues across the whole system.
So,
big challenges there. We've got a lot of tools to help.
Some of them still need improvement, but
they are very strong tools that we've got to help.
What we're doing with the move on orders is saying, yes, we're doing all that,
but what we're missing is a tool for police to deal with
people who, for whatever reason, don't want to take up any
of those
areas of help on offer, and still think, and there are
connections with a whole host of broader crime within the CBD, think it's their
right to occupy
the main street of our cities,
and create an environment where people who live there, people
who work there, and people who visit there don't feel safe.
And that's what we're determined to change.
All right. I'm going to a supplementary.
This will be the last on this topic, and we're going to move to some new stuff.
Tamati Coffey.
Minister, don't you think that your position that this bill will not
criminalize homelessness doesn't actually stack up when if
a homeless person is in a public space
because they're homeless, and remains in that space,
and if they're approached by a police officer and asked to move on, if they
simply do nothing and remain as they are in a
public space, then they have the possibility of
receiving a criminal conviction. Isn't that correct?
And doesn't that effectively criminalize homelessness?
No.
It quite clearly doesn't. And
we've got a commentator on the side there.
What it-
Don't worry about it.
What it criminalizes is a failure to follow an
order from a police officer, and I
assume the member is not suggesting that we should do away with any
consequences for not following a direct order,
legally based, from a police officer.
And so, that's the distinction. That it is very
easy to avoid any conviction for move on
orders, and that is to move on. And that is the purpose of the
legislation. In terms of-
Please conclude
... dealing with issues around homelessness, yes.
We all acknowledge the challenge there, and that is why the government
continues to invest on a colossal scale on behalf of
other New Zealanders in helping those who need help with their
housing. We spend, as a country, literally billions of dollars
every year to help people with housing, and we
continue to do so.
That's fine.
Finally, on this topic, Minister.
At the moment, police are able to ask a member of the
public to move on. Is that correct?
Of course, they can ask somebody to do something, but it doesn't have an
effect at the moment.
It doesn't have the possibility of a criminal
conviction.
Yeah. So there's no weight behind the ask.
And so,
I think it's blindingly obvious to people who visit our town squares that
we have a problem. And
in this government,
you've got a choice when you've got a problem that is obvious to everybody.
You can ignore it or hope it will go away, or you can deal with it, and in this
government, we are dealing with it.
Okay, members, we've got 40 minutes left.
I'd just like to remind, this is about the budget.
We could talk about the 250 million CapEx.
We could talk about the 333 million legal aid
issues. We could talk about electoral system spend of $164
million. We've got officials here.
I just ask and invite the members to try and relate it
now, this part of the budget, and we'll stop having philosophical conversations.
Who wants to start off with something new?
I've got a-
You've got a primary. I'm going to go with Rima Nate.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So Minister, we've heard often that justice delayed is justice
denied And I know that with all your kōrero in your
multiple introductions, you talk about how important it is for you
as a minister with the ministry to focus on giving New
Zealanders access to justice.
So we've got
some spending on legal aid in the budget.
I just want to ask, Minister, how does this legal aid
investment support
the government's objective of ensuring that New Zealanders
can access
justice regardless of their financial
situation?
Yes.
Thank you for that question. I suppose just to
preface that the member referred to a focus on
timely justice and
justice being delayed as effectively being denied.
And again, for the benefit of those tuning into this,
we have actually made quite significant progress in the
last couple of years on that. If you look at
the Auckland area, for example,
when we came in in February 2024,
only 71% of cases were being
heard within the appropriate timescale that has been sort of
identified across the justice sector as a reasonable time for a
particular kind of offenses. 71%, so 29%
were beyond that. We've increased that figure to
82% so far, and every percent
that goes up-- Sorry, the latest info was 85.
That's for the national.
For the national, but for Auckland.
And so every percent that we increase is hard work.
And I just want to take the opportunity right now to thank the
many thousands of people working across the justice system,
including the judiciary, but the court workers and the Ministry of Justice,
the registrars,
but also the corrections and police,
and the many people working through the legal aid system, are all
contributing to an effort to deal with very big backlogs.
So backlogs in the court cases have dropped by
26% since
2023. So that's a huge drop. So we're making some progress.
One element of that,
and it's all intimately linked with the whole legal aid budget, and so the issue
that we've had with legal aid is that
we've had a big increase in spending on legal aid, well in advance of
inflation. So it's gone up significantly. We can give you the exact figures.
But it's increased much faster than inflation.
And yet, there is still
a real sense from the sector, particularly the legal aid
providers, that there isn't enough money and there's real pressure on the system.
So they want even more. But of course, we're trying to live within our means as a
government, and so we've got to be careful about how we do that.
So we've got a real focus on
not just dealing with the--
You can't just look at legal aid in isolation, of course.
You need to look at it in the context of the broader justice sector.
So one of the most useful things we're doing, of course, is the digitizing
process, and it will make the whole system much more efficient.
And that'll be great. Then we need to look at the legislative context.
So we've got a program of work underway at the moment, which
is looking at
some gritty things, such as thresholds for jury trials, which have
a massive implication on the cost.
If you go through a jury or through a judge-alone
trial in terms of legal aid costs, a massive difference.
And so that's part of the equation.
So this budget, what we've done is we've
put another $30 million into the legal aid budget
to keep things going at a
reasonable level over the next 12 months.
But we've got a furious effort underway
across the sector,
involving all the key players, to think more radically about how
we can get the whole system more efficient and take some pressure
off that legal aid budget so that the amount that we put into
it achieves more outcomes. I don't know if there's anything you wanted to add
on that, Dave.
No, I think that covers it. The legal aid spend,
as the minister says, has gone up in the
civil jurisdiction. It's gone up by 42% over the last
five, six years, by 34% in family, and in criminal, between 23% and
76%. And that's driven by a lot of things.
It's driven by the many things that fundamentally mean that the system
isn't working as well as it should.
So the election rates on juries have increased.
In Auckland, they're getting up towards 48% now, yet in Auckland, only 9% of
those cases actually end up
in a trial. And that means that before you get to that point, you have a whole
lot of churn and additional change, and the bill for that obviously
amounts as you go along. So we're looking to a process where we will work
closely with the profession so that we can come up with solutions that are
quite practical, recognizing obviously that this is a whole system, so there's a
clear set of judicial responsibilities in here that we have to be mindful
to respect as well. And then there's the effort of all of the other agencies.
So minister says, and I think rightly so, that we've actually been
making pretty remarkable progress in this space and at a
time when a lot of the pressures are going against us.
But there's this big challenge in front of us,
and it manifests. It's not all born in the legal aid system,
but it manifests there, where you see these costs going up.
Yet
the legal aid
profession, the lawyers who work in it, will talk of a system that
from their point of view is not working well at all.
So we've
got to
recognize we're spending more money for not better outcomes in the legal aid space.
And can I ask, please, just a quick supplementary.
Is that
maybe one of the reasons why it is time limited, so that you can progress
the- We'll monitor the progress or lack thereof and see how-
Yeah
... how certain things-
Absolutely. Absolutely. So we made the decision not just to
extend that extra 30 million a year in
perpetuity, because we really want a hard look at
the situation. And we had a three yearly
triennial review of the legal aid system.
They came up with suggestions, but I felt it didn't go far enough, and so that's
why we're going through this program of work over the next few months.
Yep. Thank you.
Members, I want to finish this thing on legal aid.
I've got a number of supplementaries, I've got three to come.
Next one from Camilla Belich. Then I'm going to come to you.
Minister, surely one of the reasons that the costs in
relation to legal aid are projected to increase is because
this government is passing legislation which
increases the number of crimes which people can be charged with.
For example, the move-on orders that we've already covered and the Crimes Amendment
Act, which have significant implications for the number of people
who are likely to be charged for more minor offenses like theft.
So surely, first of all, that is a factor in it.
And secondly, because there is such a significant reduction of 35 million in the
'27, '28 year,
aren't we facing a crisis in relation to legal aid?
And there doesn't appear to be, or please tell me if there is, a plan to address
this.
Well, absolutely there is a plan. And I wouldn't say it's a crisis.
I'd say it's a--
I'd describe it as a, it's one of many serious
challenges that we have across the justice system.
And so what we've done is we've given an
extra year of funding with a very clear plan over the next
few months through a program of work to
canvas the various options for different things that we can do across the whole
sector
to bring about more efficiencies in the system and thereby take
pressure off the legal aid system.
And then in the next budget, we'll make a judgment as to how much we need to
put into the system going forward.
In terms of the legislation, yeah, well,
yes, we make no
bones about this government over the last two and a half years
passing a lot of legislation to restore real consequences for
crime. And the only point I'd make is I find it
interesting that the member supports some of them,
such as stalking legislation,
but chooses to demonize others which they don't seem to
like. But for us,
the approach is consistent, which is that
we want to restore real consequences for crime.
Right. Dr. Jiannan.
Thank you.
Honest statement.
I just have a couple questions around legal aid. Thank you for the update.
Can I just check in terms of the continuation of the work program further
on from the triennial legal aid review,
what considerations has the ministry given to use of AI in the context
of legal aid?
Well,
personally, as well as a minister, my expectation is that
good consideration will be given by both the
legal
practitioners and the government departments
into the use of modern technology
and new tools that
they provide.
And AI generally is of most use when it comes to
data and statistics and repeatable things and doing them in a more
effective way. So my expectation is that everybody will be given thought
to how best to use that. I don't have any particular--
We haven't made strict sort of rules about
that, but that's certainly my expectation, and the secretary might be able to make
some observations about that.
As minister says, we are looking at the application of AI
across the board in lots of different ways.
Moving to a more digitized system, that we will do through Te Ureka,
opens up a whole lot of doors that currently are closed to us, or that are much
harder to affect using AI. It's much more difficult to bring
AI if you have to first convert paper-based things into a digital
format and then bring the digital analysis that AI might enable.
In the legal aid space specifically, we are looking at
whether we can bring also more digitization to how we run the administration of
that process. We would expect that in time, but I would note that this
is in time, that will enable us to use technology
much more effectively in terms of making sure that system runs very efficiently
and effectively. So at that level, I think we will
see the opportunity for the application of tools, but we are not currently,
and in the plan for the next 12 months, we're not currently looking to
make material changes to the using AI in that system.
Just in terms of the funding for legal aid, as we have heard, there's been an
increase in demand when it comes to legal aid,
but how come
was there a funding cut to the legal aid?
Despite the $30 million one-time, one-off injection, there's been an
overall decline, particularly when we're looking at almost $8 million
reduction in legal aid family services.
Well,
I think that sums up the Greens. There's a 30 million injection, which they
describe as a cut.
So
It's an overall cut. That's not
actual data on budget.
Well, so what we're trying to
achieve is...
I go back to my opening comments.
Just to remind people, we're talking about a budget.
And in this budget, New Zealanders over the next 12 months
will be borrowing $11.4 billion
in terms of the deficit we're running.
So we're still spending more than we're earning.
And we're passing that bill To our children and our grandchildren, and we
don't think that's right. And so we're determined to get back to a surplus,
and that means that we have to make tough decisions right across the board.
With all due respect-
And this is one element of that. But we will invest
more in legal aid down the line once we've gone through this program of
work, and we've rattled every cage to ask
ourselves, does the system as a whole do things in
an efficient manner? And are there things that we can do differently that
one consequence of which will be more timely access to justice, but
another consequence of which will be that the legal aid system
can be more efficiently spent, and not having to be spending legal aid
on people churning through the system and adjournments and
driving around, going to things when they could be done on AVL, and a whole bunch
of other things that would make a real difference.
With all due respect, Minister, we're not here to discuss this government's
mismanagement when it comes to financial outcomes.
Oh, my.
We can if we want to-
Oh
... but I'm here specifically asking whether the reduction of funding to legal aid
would still continue to meet the demand that exists.
Can I help you on that?
Okay. All right.
Looking forward to hearing.
Okay.
Andy Fullbrook, chief financial officer.
The budget for the ‘25, ‘26 year-
That's going to go well
... started at 2, 328 million. During the
year, we have moved some money to, because we had some one-off costs
going through legal aid, which we don't expect to be going forward any further.
So the budget for ‘25, ‘26 was increased from 328 to
338.
And then for the forecast for next year, we believe
our spend for the legal aid will be the 333.
So that's the difference between those two years.
All right. Very good.
That's very clear. Thank you.
Now I've got a sup- I think the last supplementary on this issue,
maybe two.
So-
From Todd Stephenson. I want to finish off this topic and then we're going to move
so-
Probably for you, Mr. Kibblewhite.
Mm.
I get a lot of feedback around legal aid, particularly from lawyers.
And I think you said you're going to be working with the profession.
Are we going to see some change to legal aid rates?
Because that's one of the issue. They basically haven't changed for quite a long
time, and we're now getting that cases are more complex, et cetera.
So how are you looking at that?
So the
revenue that a legal aid lawyer gets comes both from the fixed rates that
there are, and then it comes from the additional costs that they might bring
and seek for additional reimbursement from.
The fixed costs were last adjusted,
well, actually they haven't been adjusted for quite a long time.
Yes.
The variable REM rates were adjusted in 2022.
I think one of the issues that we clearly have to look at as we go into this
process is the overall
package. So,
that will inevitably have to look at how much
lawyers get paid and how that payment system is structured.
So how much of it goes through the fixed fee and how much of it is available for
amendments to grant, and what REM rate assumptions are made in that space.
So, I don't think we can not look at those things as we look through the
system because actually, alongside the cost increase end, there
are the, what we heard in the triennial review is that
this legal workforce was struggling for retention in places.
Yeah.
So we have a situation here that is
struggling both in the cost end and its
kind of almost its internal capability and sustainability.
And we'll have to look at the whole picture in that.
But clearly it has to be done within a funding envelope.
That will mean we have to be looking at not just at how legal aid is
structured at the broader system, so therefore the issues that the minister
identified around jury election rates-
Yeah
... and how some of those are tracking.
We'll have to actually be looking at all of that.
But of course, within that, we'll have to be thinking about how much lawyers get
paid for all the things that they do.
Okay.
Very last question on this issue.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Commissioner.
Thank you. Going to the sort of systemic issue around legal aid
rates, propagation, access to justice,
are you working with the police to improve their
disclosure system in conjunction with your digitalization work?
The reason I say this, having worked for a decade and course across the entire
country,
people have to
enter a plea if they have initial disclosure under Section 12 of the Criminal
Disclosure Act. Initial disclosure is a summary of facts, a conviction
history,
and a charging document. There's no evidence is required.
The election of judge-alone trial or jury trial has to be made at the time
of entry of a plea. So the default position is to preserve your position,
elect trial by jury, and figure out what the evidence is.
Well, we've had very strong feedback on that topic and
the member rightly identifies that you have to deal with this as
a system.
And
my observation coming into it was that
you've got police, you've got corrections, you've got the
justice department,
you've got the judiciary,
and you've got the lawyers, and everybody blames everybody else for the
problem. And so the best way
to deal with that, of course, is to get everybody in the same room,
on a regular basis, which is what we do, and say, "Okay, well, how
are we going to fix this?" The police say,
well, the defendants say the police aren't ready and the police say, well, the
defendants don't turn up, and square them off.
So, that's very much the approach we're taking, and so there's been a big effort on
the police side through the Police Prosecution Uplift Program-
Budget ‘25
... which we've invested in Budget ‘25 to improve their levels of being
ready. The question around the timing of the election
of jury trials and how best to manage
that is something that we're considering as part of this broader review, because I
think that that is an issue that's raised.
And, so all of those things are very much on the table and part of the discussions.
Okay. I'm excited to announce that we're moving to a new topic.
Jamie Arbuckle
Minister, the biggest event of 2026, and I'm not going to be talking
about football or rugby, but it's the election 2026 happening in
November.
Yes.
$164 million allocated. My
questions are around, it's not simply just normal
spending because the Auditor-General
reviewed in 2023, we did have issues around
accounting and processes. So how much of that money's been
allocated to remedy some of those issues going
into this election?
Now, I'll get the exact figure. I have it in mind, it's about 28 million,
but I-
Yes
... something in that
area, but we'll get that confirmed.
I wouldn't be able to confirm that right now, the
precise breakdown of how much of that money is going to remedial actions and how
much of it's going to the general search to get an election year.
But we could come back to the committee with that.
We can, but
the basic point that you're making is the correct one, that
every three years, obviously we have an election.
It's a big and expensive business, and there was a
number of areas of dissatisfaction with the last election.
Some mistakes were made,
and there were debates about a number of things.
And so, we had a detailed review of that, and a number of recommendations were
made. And the Electoral Commission is
rectifying those issues and very focused on it.
Another thing that's changed is, of course, that I've appointed a new
chair of the Electoral Commission, Simon Moore, who I have a high degree of
confidence in.
And we've also extended the board because it was a very unusual structure,
where you had the chief electoral officer, the chair, and one other person, three
of them, who were effectively the board.
And at the last election,
through a number of
illness, essentially, one of those three was not available.
And so it was quite a strange
oversight. We now extended that board to have a
wider range of skills available, and I want to thank all the members across the
House for supporting that. And I have a high
level of confidence that that overall oversight will ensure that we get a
very good outcome. Of course, the most important-- Well, there's a huge
number of things
that the Electoral Commission's focused on, and they're rightly independent, and we
have a very good
tradition of that in this country, and we hope to determine that.
In terms of the outcome of the election, I can confidently predict that we will
win.
Supplementary, if I may, Mr. Chair.
Yeah.
Your public confidence has declined.
Yes.
And I think the measure they use was something like
76% down to 66.
Yeah.
So how important is it for you as minister to see that
rise?
Well, very important, and so again, for the
benefit of those tuning in and listening in to this, there are various levers that
a minister can have when it comes to the Electoral Commission.
Bearing in mind, the Electoral Commission, for obvious reasons in a democracy, has
a significant degree of independence
from government of the day, because obviously we need to have an
even playing field when it comes to the running of elections.
But the three levers are the appointment of the
chair and the board.
Then secondly, I write a letter of expectations to them,
focusing on particular things. And one of the things that I focused on in my letter
of expectation is that I expect you to have a plan and to be
able to demonstrate a plan to increase the levels of trust that New Zealanders
have in the Electoral Commission.
And so,
that they come back to me with all the things that they're going to do and what
they're doing. Of course, the most obvious way to improve that is to have
no mistakes, and timely results and all those sorts of things.
And then finally, another
thing that obviously, put in my letter of expectations was
a focus on getting as large a number of New Zealanders
enrolled by rip date, so as to reduce the number of
special votes. And then thirdly, of course, we have the option of
legislative change. And every three years, Parliament makes a few
changes to the rules in order to make the whole system more efficient.
And do you think those changes that have been legislated for
make
more timely decisions at elections?
Well, yes. I think it will,
and there's been much discussion around that.
But the primary reason given
for-- Remember that we used to be able to get election outcomes in two weeks,
and then it suddenly grew to three.
And all the advice I had was that if we did nothing, it'll be going heading towards
four.
And people might say, "Well, why does that matter?" Well, it does matter
because the history of New Zealand in recent elections
is most of them
negotiations haven't been able to start on forming a government until the final
results, because they shift around quite a lot between election day and
the final results.
And that leads to an extended period of
uncertainty in our country.
And we haven't, to date, had a real crisis
during that period, but we never know. We might.
And so I think there is a real interest in getting a timely outcome.
And so, the main driver of that was the
steady and very significant growth of special votes, which on average take
about 10 times more time and effort to
deal with. And they were just growing and growing and growing.
And thanks to the previous administration, we were sending New Zealanders a very
mixed message, which was to say, "Do your legislative
duty, which is to be enrolled.
Please get enrolled." But by the way,
at the same time, we were telling them, "But don't bother because you can do it on
election day when you turn up to vote." And most people were hearing the second
message and not the first message.
And so fewer and fewer people were enrolled in time.
More and more people were enrolling at the
box, and that was taking more and more time to get voter, and that's
why we're changing it.
Right. We'll go to supplementary on the same issue.
Yes. Just on that last bit, Minister, can I just check-
Yeah
... has the minister or ministry investigated automatic registration on a person's
18th, which is both cheaper, as we've seen in other
countries,
but also a more effective way of getting people to register to vote?
Yes, we have looked at that, and as-
The Electoral Commission is looking at a process of how they
modernize the election in a range of ways.
So they've got more of the electronic enrollment.
They'll be doing-- looking at more of that now, and then there's a program of work
that will lead in towards the '29 election as well.
I'm specifically referring to automatic registration.
So when a person turns 18, they are automatically registered.
I think that's something-
Bringing in the heavy hitters.
There we go.
We have looked at it.
Yeah.
There's one unique feature of the New Zealand electoral system
that adds some complexity, which is that we have two rolls.
And so one of the things would be how you would make a call as to which roll you
automatically register someone on. So that's one of the tricky parts.
But we have looked at it.
And that's the one complication. If you automatically enroll people, which roll do
you automatically put them on?
And a simple answer would be, say, put them all on the-
Last question
... on the general roll, and then give people the opportunity to shift.
But then some people might say, "Well, that's not right." And so that is a
technical quirk we've got.
I understand. Thank you for that. But can I just check that other than that quirk,
is that something that you're actively-
Yes
... the ministry's actively pursuing?
Yes. All right, cool.
Cool.
Now, we're coming back to Camilla Belich
with a new topic.
Thank you.
I want to talk about women's imprisonment.
This has huge budgetary implications for New Zealand, not only in this budget, but
in the future. The women's prison population has almost
doubled under this government and is projected to
rise by 63% over the next decade.
And I want to ask the minister,
is that acceptable to you? And what are you going to be
putting in place to ensure that
the effect of this is mitigated,
especially in relation to not only the fiscal costs, which of course the government
will have to meet, but the huge social costs that will
arise from having such a large number of women within our
criminal justice system. I would remind the minister that the
vast majority of women who are imprisoned and who are
charged are actually not
charged with violent offenses.
Yes. Well, my answers
reflect the answers that I gave earlier around general
prison population growth. We don't
celebrate in more people being in prison.
We don't want to have a much larger prison population in
our country. We want to see fewer people in prison.
But our focus as a government, of course, is primarily reducing the
number of victims of crime. And our
goal to reduce the prison population is to reduce crime first,
and that will flow through to a lower prison population.
I want to make the point, for people tuning in, that it's not
easy to get sent to prison in this country.
You do have to make a real effort,
and that is either the vast
majority of people generally in prison are there because of violent
and sexual offending.
The member is right to point to a difference in terms
of the gender. But to get into prison, one
needs to be
convicted of a
serious offense or a number of repeated
offenses that collectively lead to an imprisonment.
So,
I'm not happy with it. I would like to have fewer people in prison.
But we do want to see a reduction in offending.
So supplementary to that, the
Crimes Amendment Act that the minister has put forward is one of the
pieces of legislation which has been pointed to directly for the number of
women
in prison likely to increase over the next decade.
So I just wanted to ask his response on that.
But also,
there is a program in the budget
on reducing disproportionality of Maori, and we
know that Maori women are a disproportionately high
level of
the female prison population. So isn't there an innate
contradiction in the programs that the minister, and the
decisions that the minister is making?
On one hand, he's investing in a program to look at why
more Maori are disproportionately imprisoned, and on the other hand,
he's passing legislation which is likely to increase the number of
those same groups of people who are incarcerated.
Well, no, because
we're very consistent and clear in our views that there do
need to be consequences for crime.
And,
in the context of retail crime, there need to be consequences for it.
And what we saw as a country,
and
I think people need to just cast their minds back to the chaos that we were seeing
in the retail sector
two or three years ago, and where people were
encountering people coming out of supermarkets with trolleys full of food and not
paying for it, and we needed to do something in that space.
And there are a number of things, but there need to be some consequences for that.
And so one of the things in the Crimes Act actually is something that
will help on the point that the member is making.
It introduces an infringement regime, which is a fine, rather
than going through the court system and potentially, if
one is convicted over and over again and not getting the
message, ending up potentially in prison.
The imposition of a fine at the start hopefully will actually send
a clearer message that it won't be tolerated and there are consequences,
and deal with the situation. But at the same time, of course,
we're very mindful of the disparities in the prison population,
and the over-representation of Maori.
And that's why, as a government, and I
acknowledge the work of the previous government in this space, and the government
before that, and the government before that, it's been a long
series of efforts made to reduce
that disproportionality. And we've got a lot of programs underway across the
justice sector. Most important one being
the Te Ao Marama court processes. We've got the
alternative pathways for Wahine Maori, such as Ara
Poutama, Wahine a Rere ana ki a
Pae Hau strategic plan, the Apanui Justice
Program, the Te Pae Oranga, a whole series of
programs that are
dedicated to
providing different approaches.
And
I think the only conclusion I'd make is that it's hard work,
but we're throwing everything we can at it.
Right. Dr. Sun, just to finish this topic.
Yep.
Then we're going to come back to a new one.
Just want to note that the minister would mention at the end, Te Ao Marama has been
forced while it's being reviewed.
But I want to check in terms of the correlation between the budget and also
measurable outcomes. Can the minister give us an
international comparable where incarceration has led to a
reduction in crime?
Well, I don't have an international
matter, but somebody as part of the team might.
In terms of measurable progress, I can only point
to the most basic and fundamental measurable progress, that we have
46,000 fewer victims of
violent and sexual offending in this country than we did two and a
half years ago. And that is 46,000
fewer families that have gone through the trauma of being victims of
crime. And so that's pretty powerful, I would have thought.
What was the first point that you raised, which I just wondered-
Te Ao Marama has been-
Te Ao Marama. Yes. So Te Ao Marama. Yes.
I
suppose it is a contrast between this government and the previous one.
So there's been a very significant expansion
of the Te Ao Marama courts, which are,
just for people tuning in and who might not know what the heck is that, it's
a court
that very much incorporates
Maori approaches to
crime and justice and involving the broader
community and the whanau,
and a more restorative approach to justice.
And that was a court-led
system that started off and has been sort of
expanded into several different places.
Now, there was
a projection to keep on expanding it quite
vigorously that we inherited. And I made the obvious
point, well, hang on a moment.
What evidence do we have of the difference that this is making
before we expand? And so what we've decided to do is, and I think starting
next year, a thorough assessment.
We'll have enough time under our belt to be able to
get some measurable progress. And once we've done that, we'll be in a better
position to
either stay where we are or progress further.
Okay.
And we've started the evaluation, but it will be concluded next year
because of that period of time. And some of the Te Ao Marama
practices are being applied throughout all courts.
It's just those where there are particular funding streams attached with
community providers that is limited to the eight courts where
it's had a more comprehensive rollout.
Right. We've got five minutes left.
Camilla Belich is going to introduce-
We don't have to use all the time, Mr. Chair, if people are tired.
Well, we've got-
Hang on
... hold the ministry to account.
Okay.
Right. Camilla.
Minister, how much of the baseline funding in this
budget will be directed towards legislative and
advice associated with preventing Mike
from taking further legal action in relation to
climate change for aura? And with
that proposed legislation, when do you envisage that
that will be introduced, and will it be passed before the
election?
Well,
in terms of the precise figures of-
Is this your jurisdiction or is it-
Yes. It's definitely my-- Yes, and the Ministry of Justice officials-
Okay
... were involved in the formation of the cabinet paper and the
legislation being developed. I don't have an exact figure.
Somebody would be able to figure that out, I would imagine, although it's quite
difficult to disentangle it from all the other things that we do in the justice
space. We did that,
as is well known publicly, because of our concern around
the risk of a parallel system developing,
whereby businesses that were
compliant with the government decisions around how we respond to climate
change and the system that was set up fully compliant with that
would
potentially be liable for a parallel system that had been
developed in the courts. And so we were determined
to deal with that through legislation.
In terms of the timing of its introduction into the House and its passing,
those are still matters that are being considered within the context of
the program of the House.
Supplementary on that. In terms of your role as Minister of Justice
and the decisions you make around spending, do you think that this case
was dealt with in a transparent way?
And if not, do you think that you should be investing more
into advice, looking at how
people can have confidence in the processes that the government
has made around dealing with
corporate interests and
their obligations under the Official Information Act and the decisions that the
executive-
Yes.
We're very mindful of that-
Yeah
... and we
obviously take
enormously
seriously the need to maintain confidence in the broader
system that we have.
And I think as has been documented, there were
some
lapses in some of the information
that was passed on
that I think the Prime Minister has referred to, and we weren't
happy with that, and we're seeking to deal with that in an
appropriate way. In terms of having
access to people,
of course,
we're a small country where a lot of people have access to people.
Mark Smith, the litigant, had access to ministers
as well. And so,
that's part of how we work. But yes, there are probably lessons that have been
learned along that way.
Right. Now, Rima Nakha has been the most patient person on this committee,
so I'm going to allow her to finish off.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, throughout the justice there is a
lot of references to reducing victims of crime.
And you-
Reducing the number of victims
... the number of victims of crime.
And you've spoken a number of times about the stalking
legislation, which was quite a milestone move.
Minister, can you just clarify, because there seems to be some misinformation,
what led to the stalking legislation being introduced,
and who made it happen?
Well-
Is this related to budget?
No
... all these things are a collective effort, but the only point I'd make
is it's something that has been called for widely for a long
period of time.
The previous administration obviously had priorities but
didn't get an opportunity to prioritize it.
Try and keep it within the budget.
And we did. And so part of the
point that is often made by members opposite in terms
of the significant costs of the justice system and the corrections
system
for holding people to account is true.
And one element of that is the stalking legislation, which
will lead to some people who have stalked
other New Zealanders and made their lives miserable, will be held
more effectively to account, and we're pleased to have got on and done it.
A lot of talk about it, but we've got on and done it, and I'm very pleased that
we've passed that legislation.
Thank you.
Right. Minister, I want to thank you for being here and being very
open. I want to thank the Secretary of Justice and the team.
I want to just reiterate our thanks to you for what you do on behalf of New
Zealanders, and hopefully you can go and have a nice relaxing lunch-
See you after lunchtime
... after this.
Can I just check, just so I am not